What do you call a cat that is missing a leg A threeline
What's the square root of 69? ATE SOMETHING!
TIFU by complimenting a co-worker's womanly hips. Get over it, Steve.
Why is China Overpopulated ? Because their condoms are made in china. 
Have you heard of the new rumor about butter? Never mind, I don't want to spread it.
I'm actually really happy with Trump's presidency so far. He's had the nuclear codes for a couple of days now and hasn't tweeted them yet.
How did Reese die while eating cereal? Witherspoon
Why doesn't Mexico ever win any medals in the Olympics? Because everyone who can run, jump, or swim has already crossed the border.
How do Muslims do foreplay? They tickle the goat on the chin.
What do you call a psychotic Japanese person who likes dried fruit? A craisin.
I blew a speaker in my truck today He was a motivational speaker. Felt pretty good about myself afterwards.

Gotta love Doug Stanhope.
LPT: Don't use glass doorknobs You might end up with a house-fire.
What is the worst part about being socially anxious and trying to tell a joke to a group of people? You'll probably punch up the fuck line.
Bill Gates got a new job at a glass company. He installs windows.
On a scale of 1 to 4, how much skin does an Italian Christian have? Four skin
Words that make men go limp Where is that condom?

Is it in?

Not unless you marry me.

I tested positive.

What's that daddy?

We need to paint the ceiling.

God forgive us for this awful sin we are about to commit.


Too many Questions, No Answer! 

A father was walking with his young son. The

boy said, “Daddy, what is electricity?”

“Well, now, I don’t really know”, said the father. “I never knew much about electricity. All I know about it is that it makes things run.”

A little farther on, the boy said, “Daddy, how does the gasoline make the automobiles go?”

The father replied, “Well, I don’t know. I don’t know much about motors.”

Several more questions followed with much the same result; until at last, the boy said, “Gee, I hope you don’t mind my asking so many questions?”

“Not at all son”, said his father, you go right ahead and ask. How else will you ever learn anything?”
What is the most boring fish out there? A dull-fin...
Where do cheeses go to the bathroom? In a Parma-John.
ATTENTION: This afternoon I will attempt to travel back in time and change history.  You'll know I've succeeded if Germany loses world war II and Wednesday comes after Tuesday.
How does Moses prepare his coffee? Hebrews it. 
My dog has been chasing people on bikes lately so I had to take away his bike
Funeral Speech! 

The story is told of the hard-bitten old Quaker who had died. At the funeral service, those who had gathered were standing silently by, waiting, as was the custom, for anyone who might wish to do so, make some tribute to the departed. At last one old man spoke and said,

Well, I can say one good thing about William. He wasn’t always as mean as he was sometimes.
Good Man, but…………….. 

Jock said to his wife one night,

“Weel, Maggy, I think I will go and pay my respects to the new neighbour”.

Upon his return sometime later, Maggie said,

“Weel, Jock, what kind of a mon is the new neighbour?”

“He is a guid mon”, replied Jock

“A guid mon and verra liberal with his liquor. But verra bad quality. In fact, Maggie, it was that bad, I nearly left some.”.

 
Why are Ewoks so happy when Scandinavian people come to live with them? Because they become Endor-Fins
I'm not keen on Neanderthal comedy. It's very low-brow humour. 
Sex is like Maths Sex is like Maths: You add the bed, subtract the clothes, divide the legs, and pray you don't multiply.
Dave's life sucks So Dave is having a bad year, lost his wife house and job.  It's  been months and nothing is going right.  A broken man he kneels to pray, "god please I don't ask for much but please I need to win the lottery".  The lottery numbers are drawn and he is crestfallen so he tries again, "please God I can't pay my bills or afford food please let me win the lottery".  Well numbers are drawn and Dave doesn't win.  One last time he kneels to pray.  "God if I don't win the lottery I'm finished my life won't be fixable please please please make me win".  When the numbers are called he breaks down and screams and curses blaming god.  As Dave sits sobbing god appears before him, "you know you could meet me half way and buy a ticket".
What do you call a scale that always resets itself to zero? Tareable
I'm gonna open a Pho restaurant that never closes! It's called Twenty Pho Seven
Why don’t you ever see hippopotamus hiding in trees?  Because they’re really good at it.
What does Sean Spicer call emails? Alternative fax.
One day I hope to watch a cable show that says "Brought to you by.. The bill you pay every fucking month."
Are you TRYING to break the laws of physics? Because your bi*ching is the only thing constant.
What do you call the hair between your grandma's tits? Her pussy.
Ever since we started swinging my wife has talked about getting her asshole bleached But I don't think I'd look good as a blond
The elderly Italian man went to his parish...... The elderly Italian man went to his parish priest and asked if the priest would hear 
his confession. "Of course, my son," said the priest.
"Well, Father, at the beginning of World War Two, a beautiful woman knocked on my door 
and asked me to hide her from the Germans; I hid her in my attic, and they never found her."
"That's a wonderful thing, my son, and nothing that you need to confess," said the priest.
"It's worse, Father; I was weak, and told her that she had to pay for rent of the attic with 
her sexual favors," continued the old man.
"Well, it was a very difficult time, and you took a large risk -you would have suffered terribly 
at their hands if the Germans had found you hiding her; I know that God, in his wisdom and mercy, 
will balance the good and the evil, and judge you kindly," said the priest.
"Thanks, Father," said the old man. 
"That's a load off of my mind. Can I ask another question?"
"Of course, my son," said the priest. 
The old man asked, "Do I need to tell her that the war is over?".
Great books.. Helps you cook your instant ramen.
Do you pray before eating son? No father... 

My mother is a good cook.
What's the difference between Chuck Schumer and Tom Brady Tom Brady is a Patriot and a winner. 
(Thank you Dennis Miller)
Vegetarian Vampires How do you kill vegetarian vampires? with a steak to the heart.
I am living my dream everyday. Because nightmares are dreams too.
Donald Trump is already generating millions of the new jobs in America! Thanks to him, protesting is now considered a full time job! 
What do they call a bra in Sweden? A holdsemfromfloppin


Why couldn't the Tuba player get a date? He was too low key. 
a psychic midget escaped from jail Yes, we have a small medium at large
What is green, and then red? Frogs in a blender. 
I'm so patriotic; I piss red, white, and blue. My doctor told me it was pancreatic cancer. I told him to shut his commie mouth!
So, Mary Tyler Moore died. Guess she didn't make it, after all
A Scotsman moves to America [long] This is probably been here before, but I still think it's a good one. 

A Scotsman moves to America. His new coworkers invite him to a baseball game. He decides to go to try to learn more about American culture. He has a $12 hot dog and a warm beer. Throughout the game, people keep jumping up yelling "go go go! Run!" Etc. He decides that to really be like his co-workers, he needs to yell too. The next batter  gets up to the plate. 

"Ball one!" The umpire calls. "Ball two! Ball three! Ball four!"

The batter starts walking to first base. 

"Go!" The Scotsman shouts, jumping to his feet. "Run!"

"He doesn't have to run," his coworker says. "He has 4 balls."

The Scotsman looks confused for a second. Finally, he turns back to the field and shouts. 

"WALK WITH PRIDE MAN!"
After the worse accident the town has ever seen A lorry has managed to drive into a school, ran over students during their assembly. The paramedics estimate that the deaths number in more than a hundred person. In order to get to the bottom of the accident, a policeman started to question the driver.

Driver: I was just trying to avoid the lorry in front of me, but on my right there were 5 schoolkids walking, but on my left there were 2 kids on a bike. So i swallowed my guilt, and I decided to go left. Tell me officer, What would you have done?

Policeman : I would've veered to the left as well.

Driver: See? That's what I did as well!

Policeman: But if you decided to veer off to the left, and hit the two kids on the bicycle, then how did you end up in a school, running over hundreds of students?

Driver: Well, as I veered off to the left, I hit only one of them, and the other kid managed to avoid me. So I chased him into the school.

Blonde A Blonde walks into a bar, and says "OW"!
What does a 90 year old's pussy taste like? Depends.
Trumps plan for the wall works. Look at China. They built a fucking wall and you don't see any Mexicans there. 

Edit: spelling
Don't go to Canada Or you'll be sorry
I'm opening up a snack shop in DC. I'm opening up a snack shop in DC. We will serve things like:

Triple fudge brownie sunday with double whipped cream, only 100 calories!

Cheesy deep fried nachos, more vitamins and less fat than a salad!

I'll call my shop "Alternative Snacts".
Whats the difference between mcdonalds and wendy's? Quality.
Two Men were out fishing when one decides to have a smoke He asks the other guy if he has a lighter He replies “Yes I do!” and hands the other a 10 inch long BIC lighter Surprised the guy asks “Where did you get this?” The guy replies “Oh I have a personal genie.” The first man asks “Can I make a wish? ” Sure says the other man “Just make sure that you speak clearly cause he is a little hard at hearing” “Ok I will” says the other as he rubs the lamp a genie appears and asks the man what he wants The man says ” I want a Million Bucks ” The genie says OK and goes back to his bottle and 10 seconds later a million ducks fly over head And the guy says to the other ” Your genie realy sucks at hearing doesnt he?” The other man replies “I know, do you really think I asked for a 10 inch BIC”
What do Apple and Rose have in common? They both lost jack.
One day while jogging I fell and injured my leg quite badly. The doctors had to replace my patella with a metal one. It never seemed to sit quite right, and later it slipped out of the stitches onto the road. I went to grab it, but was slippery and rolled right though the sewer grate.  I stood, dumbfounded - unable to grasp the iron knee.

I snapped my fingers to get a waiter's attention. Pretty stupid really, now I need surgery. 
Donald Trump and Mike Pence are on a plane... Suddenly Mike Pence says "I can throw 100 dollars out of the plane and make 100 people happy".

Donald says "I can throw 1000 dollars out of the plane and make 1000 people happy".

The pilot over heard this and said, "I can throw both of you out of this plane and make the whole country happy."
You know what's really odd? Numbers not divisible by 2. 
Why are North Koreans better than Chinese? If North Korean goes to China they will deport him back to North Korea, but if Chinese goes to North Korea they will proudly welcome him to stay
Why was the Mercedes Benz on sales? Because they've removed 6 rows of yellow LED strips...
I pissed off two men today because I referred to them as hipsters.. Apparently the correct term is 'conjoined twins'
A feminist and a fascist walks into a bar She orders a glass of wine
Why are dirty films called snuff films? Because after watching 5 minutes of them in my room, that's snuff film for me!
Donald Trump has done so much good for American education. Now instead of citing my sources on an English paper, I can just write down, "I know it, you know it, everybody knows it."
Instead of a wall on the Mexican border, Trump could build a dome over the continental U.S. They'll call it: The Freedome. 
A European couple decided to have a baby A European couple decided to have a baby. So they stopped using condoms, started a special diet, and followed all recommendations to successfully conceive. They did this for about two years but with no luck. They went to all the best doctors in Europe, but none of them could figure out why the couple wouldn't conceive. At last, the coupleread in a newspaper that there is a shaman in Siberia who can cure every ailment imaginable to mankind. So they bought a plane ticket to Moscow, and then spent a week by train, by car, and then on dogsled to get to the remote Siberian village where the shaman lived. When they got there they told the shaman their story. The shaman listened to them and said, "Guys, have your lost your fucking mind?"
What does a robot do after sex? Nuts and bolts
What's the difference between jam and jelly? I can't jelly my dick down someone's throat.
I only drink a little, but when I do, I turn into another person... 
...and that person drinks a lot.
Why are horror movies involving camping so scary? They are in tents.
Why do the french hate League of Legends? They have to wait 20 minutes before surrendering
what do you call a male suppository? A manpon
Trump walks into a bar.... Because it was set so low.
What does the Cajun ghost say? Beaux!
Trump is single-handedly bringing down America. Actually, I take it back.

With hands that small, he'd have to use them both.
Trump has no mistresses... He has alternative fucks.
Trump with a lump in his rump. Doctor: Well Mr. Trump, there's a lump in your rump... a giant lump that can't be dumped.

Trump: You seem stumped.

Doctor: Well your dues are paid, but surgeries been delayed, have you ever heard of Row v. Wade?

Trump: That laws was stupid, now it's out of the way.

Doctor: That's true, but for you, this is really bad news. We've taken an ultrasound and we have found, your lump qualifies as a living thing, now that it's two feet around.

Trump: But doctor that thing would kill me if I don't get it out.

Doctor: Okay Mr. Trump, but you don't need to shout.

Trump: What you're saying's impossible, you're just trying to give me a hassle.

Doctor: We thought it impossible too, but we've never seen such an asshole.
What do you call a selfie taken in secret? A stealthie
What is a mantis's favourite film? Prey, Love, Eat. 
My girlfriend uses an amazing skin moisturizer It's like taking a handy from a baby!
I was trying to remember where I left my championship boxing-kangaroo... and then it hit me.
I just got a new hearse Everyone is dying to take a ride in it
[NSFW]A more honest retelling of John F. Kennedy's famous quote on lunar exploration. "We choose to go to the moon, and Marilyn Monroe's bedroom, because it is easy and because I am hard."

JFK - 1961.
A Jamaican is asked, use Dandelion in a sentence ... He then says ...
"The cheetah is faster dandelion" 


I was offered sex with a 21 year old girl today. I was offered sex with a 21 year old girl today. In exchange, I was supposed to advertise some kind of bathroom cleaner. Of course I declined, because I am a person with high moral standards and strong willpower. Just as strong as Ajax, the super strong bathroom cleaner. Now available with scented lemon or vanilla.
I was told that Microwaves were invisible But I can see mine on my counter. Is mine broken?
What do you call an epileptic frolicking in a garden? Seizure salad.
A bartender says "we don't serve time travellers here." A time traveller appears inside a bar.
Why did the Trump inauguration look so small? Camouflage!
There's a fine line between a numerator and a denominator. Only a fraction of people will get this.
Whats your favorite pickup line? Mine is: I'll give you candy if you get in the van
If athletes get athlete's foot, what do astronauts get? mistletoe
I remember when I lost my virginity. I recall my first time with a condom, I was 16 or so. I went in to buy a packet of condoms at the pharmacy. There was this beautiful woman assistant behind the counter, and she could see that I was new at it. She handed me the package and asked if I knew how to wear one. I honestly answered, ‘No, this is my first time.’

So she unwrapped the package, took one out and slipped it over her thumb. She cautioned me to make sure it was on tight and secure. I apparently still looked confused. So, she looked all around the store to see if it was empty. It was empty.

‘Just a minute,’ she said, and walked to the door, and locked it. Taking my hand, she led me into the back room, unbuttoned her blouse and removed it. She unhooked her bra and laid it aside. ‘Do these excite you?’ She asked.

Well, I was so dumb-struck that all I could do was nod my head. She then said it was time to slip the condom on. As I was slipping it on, she dropped her skirt, removed her panties and lay down on a desk.

‘Well, come on’, she said, ‘We don’t have much time.’ So I climbed on her. It was so wonderful, that unfortunately, I could no longer hold back and KAPOWWWWWWWW, I was done within a few moments.

She looked at me with a bit of a frown. ‘Did you put that condom on?’ she asked.

I said, ‘I sure did,’ and held up my thumb to show her.

She fainted.”
My friend died from eating too much waterfowl I thought he had lived a good, happy life

He told me that he was full of Egrets
What do you call a dog that has undergone an lobotomy that went wrong and gave him super powers which he uses to combat mutant radishes in the far off Andromeda galaxy? A dog.

or more specifically:

a dog that has undergone an lobotomy that went wrong and gave him super powers which he uses to combat mutant radishes in the far off Andromeda galaxy
You ask the doctor if it's a boy or a girl, the doctor's response: "Yes".
How did Hitler pick up Jewish girls? With a dustpan...
Guy walks into a bar. A guy walks into a bar and sits down. The bartender notices the guy and says "are you okay? You look terrible!" The guy says "yeah, i had kind of a rough night last night. I drank way too much and blew chunks." "Well that doesn't sound so bad" says the bartender. And then the guy says "no you don't understand. Chunks is my dog." 
A 1990's man walks into 2016 It was a rainy day, so he decides to stay at a hotel. He opens the door and holds it open for a lady behind him who just says "Thank you." After the rain is over, he decides to leave. As he checks out he notices the same lady holding the door for him. He goes through and says "Thank you ma'am." She then protests "How dare you assume my gender like that?"
What do you call two Mexicans playing basketball? What do you call two Mexicans playing basketball?

Juan on Juan


Roses are red... Roses are red.
Harambe was shot.
I am Rick Harrison.
This is my pawn shop.
I was having sex with my German girlfriend last night... She likes to rate my performance out of 10 in bed. 

I slipped it into her bum and she started screaming, "Nein, nein, nein!"

Thought to myself, "Wow, she must really like this". 
Who has the least karma on Reddit u/[deleted]
What's the hardest part of a vegetable? His wheelchair
Can you name a grateful astronomer? How about Neil Degracias Tyson?
My friends told me I need to socialize my chow chow while he's still young. I googled on how to socialize Chinese dogs. He understands the plight of the proletariat, but I don't think he fully grasps the concept of sharing.
Why DiCaprio was unhappy with recent science news It's not cool, when you live whole life as Leo, and then it's suddenly Cancer
What did the watermelon say to the honeydew? "I'm sorry baby, we just cantaloupe."
May you live your life with joy and may she make you miserable.
Why was the priest also an imam? Double the prophet.
What brand of underwear did Jesus wear? Fruit of the Womb
If life was reddit... I'd still be unpopular
What's your mom's favorite seafood resturant? Captain D's Nutz
Jokes about menstruation aren't funny... Period.  😈
Man & a Woman share a cabin on a trans-continental train A man and a woman who had never met before, but who were both married to other people, found themselves assigned to the same sleeping room on a trans-continental train.

Though initially embarrassed and uneasy over sharing a room, they were both very tired and fell asleep quickly, he in the upper berth and she in the lower.

At 1:00 AM, the man leaned down and gently woke the woman saying,……….

‘Ma’am, I’m sorry to bother you, but would you be willing to reach into the closet to get me a second blanket? I’m awfully cold.’
‘I have a better idea,’ she replied ‘Just for tonight,…… let’s pretend that we’re married.’

‘Wow!…………………. That’s a great idea!’, he exclaimed.
‘Good,’ she replied. ………….’Get your own fucking blanket.’
After a moment of silence, ………………….he farted.
The End
This fibonacci joke  is as bad as the last two you heard combined
Whats the difference between a murder and Hamlet performed by geese? Nothing, they're both fowl play
Why didn't Ann Frank finish her diary? She needed more concentration.
Why does Jew population suffer more from ADHD ? Because they needed too much concentration in camps.
Two rabbits were being chased by a group of hunters One turned to the other and asked "Do we make a run for it or stay here and outnumber them?"
How does a grizzly catch fish? With his bear hands!
I asked an Australian to greet me... He kept beating around the bush saying "I might".
what's the difference between Donald trump and road kill? the road kill has skid marks before it
My brother used to think the suicide lane is for committing suicide. He only made the mistake once though
I really like the concept of train tickets. It's an idea I could get onboard with.
There are 10 kinds of people... * The ones who know binary
* The ones who doesn't know binary
* and the ones who taught that this joke was in binary...
whats the diffrence between harambe and a blackperson Everyone cares about harambe
two Jews walk into a bar in Saudi Arabia two Jews walk into a bar... NOT IN THAT COUNTRY  
An Englishman, a Frenchman, a ravishing blonde and a homely brunette... ...are sharing a compartment on a train as it winds its way through the Alps. Every now and then the train passes through a tunnel, during which time the compartment is plunged into complete darkness. On one such occasion, a ringing slap is heard and as the train passes back into daylight, the Frenchman is rubbing his sore, red cheek.
The brunette thinks 'I bet that dirty Frenchman fondled the blonde and she struck the pervert.'
The blonde thinks 'I bet that filthy Frenchman was looking to grope me in the dark, mistook the dowdy brunette for me and she slapped the beast.'
The Frenchman thinks 'I bet that perfidious Englishman touched up the blonde in the dark and she slapped me by mistake.'
The Englishman thinks 'I can't wait for another tunnel so I can slap that French twat again.'
I met a really cool girl name Helicase, but there's a problem... ... she's always trying to unzip my genes.
Adult Panda “A panda walks into a bar. He asks the bartender how he can get a little action for the night. The bartender motions to a young woman. She talks to the panda, and they go back to her place. After having sex, the panda abruptly leaves. The next night, the woman goes to the panda's house. "You owe me money," she says. "For what?" The woman rolls her eyes and explains, "I'm a prostitute." The panda pulls out a dictionary and looks it up: "Prostitute: Has sex for money." The panda says, "I don't have to pay you. I'm a panda. Look it up." She is about to protest when the panda hands her the dictionary. The woman looks up "panda" in the dictionary, and it reads, "Panda: Eats bush and leaves.” 
When does a joke become a dad joke? When the punchline becomes apparent.
I don't mind being back on my meds... I just think it's sad that at the same time all the dogs in the neighbourhood stopped talking to me.
My doctor diagnosed me with severe lack of observation. That came out of nowhere.
You can commit as many crimes as you want when you're ugly. You'll never be wanted.
whats the difference between a dead baby and a lamborghini? I dont have a lamborghini in my garage
How did the pirate greet to the prostitute Yo ho
I'll make ye blow
What do you call a pressure cooker bomb in New York? All American Fried Chicken!
How do you make a blonde's brain resemble a pea? You inflate it and paint it green.
I would tell a funny science joke... but all the good ones Argon.
school grades Teacher: "Those that study for As and Bs will go to Heaven, those for Es and Fs will end up in Hell". 
Voice from the back row: "Is there a chance we can finish school alive at all?"
Why can't vets use dank memes? Because they'd get fired for beating a dead horse.
How do you comfort a grammar Nazi? they're, their, there
What's the difference between a good secretary and a *great* secretary? A good secretary says "Good morning sir." and a *great* secretary says "*It's* morning sir."
What's the opposite of Christopher Reeves? Christopher Walken.
What do you call a clock you wear on your belt? A waist of time
This joke isn't funny. What do you say when the punchline's told first?
Every time I eat seafood, my tummy hurts That's because some guy keeps yelling at me to stop stealing his shrimp
Why are camouflage jokes always great? Because you never see them coming.  
I can't stand pedophiles - Fucking immature assholes.
I work construction. Today I got on a new job at an existing hospital, but couldn't find my way around... Wearing ragged overalls, and smelling of old pennies, I politely asked a nurse if she had seen the company I was here to meet. She informed me they were set up on the roof. We were both on the ground floor at the time and upon seeing the disdain in my eyes she offered to show me to the access area. She was a cute little blonde thing, and I accepted the offer. 
She takes me to the elevator and we ride up to the 5th floor. She's yapping about something I wasn't fully paying attention to as I'm trailing her down the corridor. I glance left and right through the oblong windows in the doors to the patients rooms. Not much to see. 
As we near the end of the end of hall, she turns back to face me and spots me staring straight into a patients room, my mouth ajar. 
"That man is in there jerking off!" 
It was fairly violent too. She informed me he had a rare condition that would result in cardiac arrest unless he rubbed one out every couple hours.  I told her to keep me away from that guy. 
We climbed up one more flight of stairs and turned down another corridor with rooms lining either side. 
"It's just ahead sir," she said, " just through the double doors at the end." 
I was still a shook up about the scene I'd just witnessed one level below, so she took me the rest of the way. 
Sure enough I see another man, a FULLY grown man, yanking on his thing. HARD. 
"What the hell is going on around here?" I asked her. 
"That man has the same issue as the fellow downstairs. Isn't that interesting?" She exclaimed. 
'Hardly,' I thought. We kept walking. 
Just then, to no avail, I look into another room, unable to keep my prying eyes away, and there it was. A nurse in her little whit outfit, hair tied up in a bun, blowing this mans cock! Right there in the patients room!
I asked the nurse I was with, "So what's the deal with this guy??"
She looked over her shoulder slowly, "Same disease, better health coverage."
Pence and Trump are standing on a high balcony.  Below them is a great crowd. Trump whines, "They're so sad. Can't we cheer them up a bit?" Pence looks him up and down. "Well," he says, "you could jump."

Why did they make the toilet paper so hard in North Korea? Because the Party wants to make every asshole Red.
How do make a Kia twice as valuable?  Fill up the tank
I told everyone I was going to be a comedian And they all laughed at me. Now I'm a comedian, and they're not laughing anymore. 
What is Hitler's favourite animal? Adolphin
Often happens to me Remember, if you smokes after sex you're doing it too fast.
A: Took my temperature today. B: Oh really? 
A: No, rectally. 
A buddy and I are in the same programming class My friend starts writing down a note

I look at it

He says "Hay! That note is private"

I respond "But we are in the same class"
What do you call an Anglican who has a fetish for golden showers? An E-**piss**-copalian!
On average, how many books can you put in an empty backpack? One. After that it's no longer empty
Why was the gay man ambitious? Because all he wanted to do was *SUCCEED*.
Thanks to recent events... I guess you could say the pressure cooker business is booming! 


I'll see myself out now.
The Detective Who was the first electricity detective?

Sherlock Ohms
What is a skeleton's favorite instrument? a trom-bone.
What's an Android developer's favourite cereal? Boot Loops
Why is the Flying Spaghetti Monster made of Pasta? Because "made of bread" was already taken by Jesus.
How do you give a solipsist an existential crisis? You tell me.
As a cop, I don't know how to deal with black people... But I guess I'll take a shot at it. 
What do the twin towers and gender have in common? There used to be two of them, but it's offensive to joke about that now.
I yelled "shotgun", long before anyone else, but I still got to sit in the backseat. I hate cops. 
what do you call a joke with a bad punchline This one
Two students are leaving a Java seminar The guy turns to the girl and says "So... how much do you weigh?"

The girl says, "I'm not telling you! That's private!"

Taken aback, the guy says "But I thought we were in the same class!!"
If Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton get in a car accident, who would be saved? America.
That's a wrap (Calling restaurant for dinner one night)

Employee: Hello?

Me: Yeah, hi. Do you guys do wraps?

Employee: Yeah, all kinds.

Me: Cool. Can I get two?

Employee: Sure!

Me: Ok, let me get one Biggie and one Pac. g'head.

Employee: ......<click>
My girlfriend left me.... she said she was sick of my tree puns
what a beech
Why did the r/jokes reader cross the road to read the repost on the other side 
Today's workout was great. I did 15 minutes of cardio, 10 minutes of defibrillator, and 3 days in the hospital.
Why I had to dump my Robot lover (at the dump) 1) She (it) She is rather cold


2) She (it) cheated on me with the mailman.


3) In the heat of the moment, She (it) said "The average size of a.....and yours is barely adequate"


4) She (it), started to make me do the house chores or she would not put out.


5) She (it) asked "Do i look fat in this?"


6) She (it) yelled at me saying "What do you mean you can't read my motherboard"


7) In the heat of the moment, She (it) asked if I knew how long it would take to get from Earth to Uranus


8) She (it) then proceeded to ask if i wanted to see Uranus (My butt puckered up faster than a mob witness to a murder)


and the #1 reason I had to dump my robot lover....

I think She (it) is a nympho.
What does an Islamist call a gorilla eating pork? Haram-be.
I'm so inept..... That when I kicked out the chair, the rope came untied
How many potatoes does it take to kill an Irishman? None.
English to become official language of the EU The European Commission has just announced an agreement whereby English will be the official language of the European Union rather than German, which was the other possibility. 
As part of the negotiations, the British Government conceded that English spelling had some room for improvement and has accepted a 5- year phase-in plan that would become known as "Euro-English". 
In the first year, "s" will replace the soft "c". Sertainly, this will make the sivil servants jump with joy. The hard "c" will be dropped in favour of "k". This should klear up konfusion, and keyboards kan have one less letter.
There will be growing publik enthusiasm in the sekond year when the troublesome "ph" will be replaced with "f". This will make words like fotograf 20% shorter. 
In the 3rd year, publik akseptanse of the new spelling kan be expekted to reach the stage where more komplikated changes are possible. 
Governments will enkourage the removal of double letters which have always ben a deterent to akurate speling. 
Also, al wil agre that the horibl mes of the silent "e" in the languag is disgrasful and it should go away. 
By the 4th yer peopl wil be reseptiv to steps such as replasing "th" with "z" and "w" with "v". 
During ze fifz yer, ze unesesary "o" kan be dropd from vords kontaining "ou" and after ziz fifz yer, ve vil hav a reil sensi bl riten styl. 
Zer vil be no mor trubl or difikultis and evrivun vil find it ezi TU understand ech oza. Ze drem of a united urop vil finali kum tru. 
Und efter ze fifz yer, ve vil al be speking German like zey vunted in ze forst plas. 
Did you hear about the Italian chef? He pasta way 
Yesterday I was buying 2 large bags of dog food from Walmart... I was about to check out when a woman behind me asked if I had a dog. What did she think I had – an elephant? 

Since I had little else to do, on impulse, I told her that no I didn’t have a dog, and that I was starting the Purina Diet again, although I probably shouldn’t because I ended up in the hospital last time. On the bright side though, I had lost 50 pounds before I awakened in an intensive care ward with tubes coming out of every hole in my body and IVs in both arms. 

I told her that it was essentially a perfect diet and that the way that it works is to load your pockets with Purina nuggets and simply eat one or two every time you feel hungry and that the food is nutritionally complete so I was going to give it a try again. 

Horrified, she asked if I ended up in intensive care because the dog food had poisoned me. I told her no; I had stopped in the middle of the parking lot to lick my balls and a car hit me. 

I thought the guy behind her was going to have a heart attack, he was laughing so hard. 
India have offered Elon Musk land to build his hyperloop... ...I hope they understand that they won't be able to hang on to the outside of the carriages.
My Lawyer said to me... “I have some good news and I have some bad news.”

“I’ve had an awful day, let’s hear the good news first,” I said.

My lawyer said: “Your wife invested $5,000 in 2 pictures today that she figured were worth a minimum of $5 million!!!”

“Well done, very good news indeed! You’ve just made my day – now what’s the bad news??” I replied enthusiastically

“The pictures are of you shagging your secretary,” he said.
Liberace was a great piano player. He sucked on the organ though. 
NSFW My doggy died today. I think I fucked her too hard... what can I say she liked it *ruff*. 
Drinking light beer is like making love in a canoe. It's fucking close to water. 
The seat seeking missiles are locked onto us! Deploying chairs!
Most men like to see some of themselves in women, the rest are gay.
At this point in my life... At this point in my life, i drink so i can smoke and I smoke after the bad decisions i made wile drinking, then I drink to forget that I am dying of lung cancer.
Two very hot girls try to tease an old man saying ... " Hey grandpa, what would you do with hot and kinky girls like us ?"

He says :

" Well with only 2 nothing much, but if i had at least 5 i would open a whorehouse. "

My new thesaurus is terrible. Not only that, but it's also terrible.
A Pirate walks into a bar... A pirate walks into a bar with a steering wheel jammed in the front of his pants, and asks the bartender for a drink. The bartender says "Sure, but what's with the steering wheel in your pants?" The Pirate gives him a serious look and says " Arrgh, It's driving me nuts!"
What do you call a 58 year old man that has sex with a 9 year old girl? The Prophet Muhammad.
My girlfriend said she was going to leave me because of my obsession with poker. I think she's bluffing.
A high school teacher walks in on a boy and a girl banging in the men's restroom... "Wrap it up."
How many Vietnam vets does it take to change a light bulb? You don't know cause you weren't there
Little Green Man A guy walks into a bar and orders a drink. There is no one else in the bar besides the bartender and this guy. Things are slow so the bartender says to the guy "Hey you want to see something cool?" The guy says sure. So they both hop into the bartenders car and start driving. They drive for 30 min before they drive up to a gate. The bartender gets out and opens the gate, gets back in and drives through, and then gets out and closes the gate. Now they are at a river. They ditch the car and get into a little paddle boat and paddle across the river. At the end is a gate. The bartender walks up opens the gate, they walk through and then he closes the gate. Now they are at a 2nd river, which is twice as large as the first river. The paddle boat across. Get to another gate and the bartender opens it, they go through, and then he closes it. Now they are at a mountain. They promptly hike over the mountain quick and come up to a gate. Bartender opens, they go through, he closes. Now they are at a 2nd mountain twice as tall as the first mountain. They hike over this one now as well. Then they come up to another gate. The bartender opens said gate, they walk through, he closes said gate. Finally, they have arrived at a cave. The bartender cups his hands around his mouth and yells "Here little green man, little green man!" All of a sudden this tiny little green man comes bee-bopping up. The guy is amazed at this phenomenon and decides he wants to touch the little green man. Just as he is reaching out the bartender pulls him back exclaiming "You must never touch this little green man!" The man obliges and they leave the cave. So they come up to a gate, the bartender opens it, they go through, he closes it. They hike over the 2nd mountain twice as tall as the first mountain. Come up to a gate, opens, walks through, closes. They hike over the first mountain. Come to the gate, open it, walk through, close it. Now they paddle boat across the 2nd river twice as large as the first river. Come to the gate. Open, walks through, closes. They paddle boat across the first river. Open gate, walk through, close gate. Drive back to the bar. So now the guy is sitting there just thinking over and over wow I could really make some money off of this little green man. So he gets in his own car this time and drives himself to the first gate. He opens it, drives through it, and then closes it. He then paddle boats across the first river. Gets to the gate, opens it, goes through it, and then closes it. He then paddle boats across the 2nd river which is twice as big as the first river. Gets to the gate, opens, goes through, closes. Now he is hiking over the first mountain. Gets to the gate, opens it, goes through it, and then closes it. Then he hikes over the 2nd mountain that is twice as tall as the first mountain. Opens the gate, walks through, closes it. He walks up to the cave and yells "Here little green man, little green man!" and sure enough the little green man comes bee-bopping out. The guy thinks to himself this is awesome! He reaches down to pick the little green man up and as soon as he touches him the little green man starts going berserk! The man is startled and takes off running away from the little green man. He runs to the gate, opens it, runs through, closes it and starts just sprinting over the 2nd mountain twice as tall as the first mountain. Gets to the gate, opens it, runs through, closes it. The little green man chasing behind the entire way. So now the man runs over the first mountain. Opens the gate, runs through, closes it. Little green man still going stride for stride. So he gets in the paddle boat and furiously rows across the 2nd river twice as large as the first river. Gets to the gate, opens it, runs through, closes it. The little green man swimming right along after him. So the guy paddles across the first river gets to the gate, opens it, runs through, closes it and then he jumps in his car and starts driving. The little green man all along the way is very visible in the mans rear view mirror. The man starts to panic so he drives to the airport. He runs up to the front desk and says "give me a ticket to the furthest place possible!" The lady at the front desk says well that would be New Zealand. So she gives him a ticket and he boards and the plane takes off. All the time the man is in the plane he can see a tiny tiny green dot on the ground. After 16 hours the plane finally lands and the man steps off. At this point the little green man comes limping up to him. He is tired, hurt, and exhausted. The man thinks OK I'm out of options I should finally give this little green man a chance to explain himself. So the man stands there while the little green man limps up to him, touches his leg and yells "TAG YOUR'E IT!"
How much do pirates charge for corn? A Buccaneer
An infinite number of mathematicians walk into a bar The first one orders one beer. The second one orders half a beer. The third one orders a quarter, and the fourth orders one eighth.

The bartender puts one beer on the table and says: "The rest of you, get out of here! We don't serve fractions here!"
You will forget. An 80 year old couple were having problems remembering things, so they decided to go to their doctor to get checked out to make sure nothing was wrong with them. When they arrived at the doctor's, they explained to the doctor about the problems they were having with their memory. 


After checking the couple out, the doctor tells them that they were physically okay but might want to start writing things down and make notes to help them remember things. The couple thanked the doctor and left. 


Later that night while watching TV, the old man got up from his chair and his wife asks, "Where are you going?" 


He replies, "To the kitchen." 


She asks, "Will you get me a bowl of ice cream?" 


He replies, "Sure." 


She then asks him, "Don't you think you should write it down so you can remember it?" 


He says, "No, I can remember that." 


She then says, "Well, I also would like some strawberries on top. You had better write that down cause I know you'll forget that." 


He says, "I can remember that, you want a bowl of ice cream with strawberries." 


She replies, "Well, I also would like whip cream on top. I know you will forget that so you better write it down." 


With irritation in his voice, he says, "I don't need to write that down, I can remember that." He then fumes into the kitchen.
 

After about 20 minutes he returns from the kitchen and hands her a plate of bacon and eggs. 


She stares at the plate for a moment and says, "You forgot my toast." 

I like my women like I like my ice cream... Smooth, pale, cold, and recently extracted from a freezer.
A girl asks a boy: "Peter, how much do you love me?" A girl asks a boy: "Peter, how much do you love me?"

The boy looks her in the eyes, "Look up at the stars, that's how much I love you."

The girl is confused, “But it’s morning, there are no stars?”

Boy nods, "Exactly!"
My computer teacher reminds me a lot of Donald Trump Honestly! He really is. This one time when we were doing Microsoft Word, he told me, "Wrap the Borders around Mexico." 
Why is the Canadian school system broken because they only give out ehs 
Remember children, you can't have Good, without God. Otherwise it would only be O.
Names for groups of animals We all know some of the common names: pride of lions, murder of crows, etc. But some aren't so well known:

construction site of cranes
chomp of alligators
giggle of girls
cancer of lawyers
When a Terrorist is shot.. He's Coward in blood.

(Credits: Original joke by a Facebook friend)
hi What did the failed Swedish chef say? All that hard Bork and nothing to show for it .
Which rock band always wash their hands before a concert? OCDC
i throw my beer bottle on the ground And my son says "dad you're littering"
I reply "no son I'm dad" and start beating him
If Tumblr was edible It would have alot of trans fat
You know I may be a white boy, but below the belt I'm black ;) My dick can't read.
What do you call it when Batman skips Church? Christian Bale.﻿
What's the difference between you and the baby I just murdered? You're gonna die a virgin.
Bored on lunch, here's one I tell often. Two hillbilly kids.. Darla and Buckwheat are at school The teacher asks Darla, 'How do you spell 'dumb'?"
Darla says, "d-u-m-b, dumb."
The teacher says, "Very good. Now use it in a sentence."
She responds, "Buckwheat is dumb."

"Now spell 'stupid'."
Darla says, "s-t-u-p-i-d."
The teacher says, "Very good. Now use it in a sentence."
Darla says, "Buckwheat is stupid."

Then the teacher calls on Buckwheat and asks, "Buckwheat, spell dictate."
Buckwheat stands up and says, otay, "d-i-c-t-a-t-e, dictate."

The teacher says, "Very good. Now use it in the a sentence." 

"I may be dumb, I may be stupid, but Darla says my dictate good!"
Imitation is not the sincerest form of flattery. Patreon support is. 
I bought a new dictionary the other day but it didn't have the word "blurry." Obviously, it lacks definition.
A man orders an expensive, 12 year old whiskey. A man orders an expensive 12 year old whiskey. The bartender has only one bottle left of the 12 year old whiskey, and doesn't want to open it. Instead, he pours the man a 4 year old whiskey, thinking that the man won't know the difference. 

The drink is passed to the man and he takes a drink, but he spits it out immediately. 

"This is at most, a four year old whiskey. I asked for twelve year old whiskey!"

The bartender apologises for his "mistake," but he still doesn't want to open his expensive whiskey. So he pours the man a glass of 8 year old whiskey, and gives him the glass. 

The man takes another drink, and spits it back out again. 

"That's closer," the man says, "but it's not the twelve year old whiskey that I wanted."

The bartender is stunned. He apologises once more and realises that this man can taste the difference, so there's no fooling him. At last, the bartender gives in, opens up the expensive 12 year old whiskey, and pours a glass. 

The man takes a drink, swallows it, and smiles. 

"Now that's the ticket," he says, "There's nothing like 12 year old whiskey."

Now I'm across the bar from this amazing man, and I go over to him and say, "Excuse me sir, but I couldn't help notice that little spectacle there, with you telling the ages and whatnot. Perhaps you'd like to try a bit of mine?"

I offer the man my glass, and he takes it. He takes a large drink, and immediately spits it out and screams, "UUUUGGHH! THAT TASTES LIKE PISS!"

And I say, "Yes, but how old am I?"
What is Donald Trump's favourite Overwatch hero? Mei, because she's from China and likes to build walls.
I used to be addicted to the hokey pokey... But I turned myself around
What did the Terrorist driving the truck say? This is nice.
What do Bits like the most? Bus driving
My relationships are like a basketball game.... I leave after the 4th period.
How many Lawyers does it take to screw in a light bulb? They don't screw bulbs they screw you
A coworker just asked me if I was voted most likely to take a joke literally by my high school yearbook committee... That wasn't even a real superlative. I swear, this guy... 
Why do penguins walk softly? Because they can't walk hardly.
A man hires a very economical prostitute My wife told me this yesterday. She is Colombian so she translated it from Spanish and I took out the racist parts. 

A man hires a prostitute and she tells him that all the prostitutes on that street have a great rate. Very economical. "It is $1 every time you push in and $1 every time you pull out", she tells him. The man thinks about it and agrees that it is a great price, gives her a dollar to start and they take their clothes off and he quickly puts his dick inside her and waits. And waits. And waits. 10 minutes pass and the prostitute gets impatient and tell the man on top of her, "Are you going to go on or what?" The man looks a little embarrassed and tells the prostitute that he is stuck inside her. She starts freaking out and tells him to do something. The man tell her that this has happened a few times to him before and asks her to call the hospital. The prostitute grabs her cell phone and calls 911 and gives the man the phone. After a few minutes of whispering to the operator, the man hangs up. "Well?! What did they say?" the prostitute screams.

"The hospital told me that you need to lend me a dollar"
What did the thermometer say to the graduate cylinder? You may be a graduate, but I still got more degrees then you.
I used to think I was into necrophilia, sadism, and bestiality... once I tried it, I realised I was just beating a dead horse.

I'm not going to bend over backwards for it. This isn't like one of my own farts.
A man walks into a bar.. ..he orders 3 shots when he realizes he needs to go take a piss

He steps next to a guy and while doing his job, he sees that the other guys dick is absurdly huge.

The guy with a huge dick asks: "Would you like to have an enormous dick like I do?"

The other guy nods hastily.

"Okay, then listen carefully! Wait until midnight, then go to the crossroad outside the village. Take the leftroad, walk about 5 minutes and then youll see a huge stone on the side of the road. On that stone will be sitting a huge toad. You will ask the toad: 

"Hello beautiful, would you like to have sex with me?".

The toad will respond: "NO!".

 And suddenly, your dick grows 4 inches!"

The man doesnt believe at first, but seeing as hes been mocked by women his entire life, he decides to give it a try.

He waits until midnight, goes to the crossroad, takes the left road, walks for 5 minutes and he sees a huge toad on a huge stone. He cant believe his eyes, but he maintains calm enough to ask: 

"Hello beautiful, would you like to have sex with me?" 

The toad responds: "NO!"

The man hurries home, rushes into the bathroom, pulls down his pants and he cant believe what he sees - his dick is now 4 inches longer! He is mesmerized - yet not satisfied.

The next day, the man decides to try his luck again. He waits until midnight, goes to the crossroad, takes the left road, walks for 5 minutes and he sees the huge toad once again. And once again he asks:

"Hello beautiful, would you like to have sex with me?"

And once again, the toad responds: "NO!"

The man can already feel his dick grow up in the pants, and he is jumping with joy! 

"Just 4 more inches, and it will be just perfect!", he thinks.

So the next day, he once again waits until midnight, goes to the crossroad, takes the left road, walks for 5 minutes and he sees the huge toad once again sitting on the huge stone. And once again he asks:

"Hello beautiful, would you like to have sex with me?"

And the toad responds:

"Are you fucking deaf?! No, no, no, no, and for the last time, NO!"
Why do Scotsmen wear kilts? Because sheep can hear a zipper up to a mile away.
What do the Japanese do when they have an erection? They vote, you lacist.
How did Canada name their country? They picked random letters from a hat. 

C, eh? 

N, eh? 

D, eh? 
Once upon a time in Africa, an elephant stepped on a bunch of ants and killed them.  The rest of the ants in the colony were very upset and planned their revenge.

The next day all the warrior ants including Elvis, the fattest ant in the colony, climbed to the highest branches of a tree beside the elephant's favorite pool. When the same elephant passed under the tree, the Elvis the fat ant jumped on top of the elephant.

The rest of the ants edged him on "Elvis, crush the beast!" "Stomp him into the ground Elvis!" "No Mercy! Let him suffer, Elvis!"

Two Policemen Two police officers crash their car into a tree. After a moment of silence, one of them says, “Wow, that’s got to be the fastest we ever got to the accident site.”


What would a pain au chocolat be called without the chocolate? A pain no chocolat.
As of this moment, I quit cursing, smoking and drinking! Fuck, I dropped my cigarette in my beer.
I was in a job interview today when the manager handed me his laptop and said, "I want you to try and sell this to me" I was in a job interview today when the manager handed me his laptop and said, "I want you to try and sell this to me."

So I put it under my arm, walked out of the building and went home.

Eventually he called my mobile and said, "Bring it back here right now!"

I said, "£150 and it's yours."

What's the most interesting beer served at the star trek swingers convention? Dos trekkies.
What's the dirtiest language? Latin, its absolutely filled with *cum*.
20 years ago we had Johnny Cash, Bob Hope and Steve Jobs. Now we have no cash, no hope and no jobs.

God please don't kill Kevin Bacon.
Why do Muslim men cry during sex? Pepper spray.﻿
Why are jewish potion makers all male? He brew
Who makes the lemonade at a hospital? A Fizzy-o-Therapist.
Agent 007 I work at an offshore contact center company. It was 4 am when my shift ended, and I was way too sleepy to even go out but then I decided to go down the stairs leading to the lobby. I must've fallen asleep because I missed a step and went tumbling down the stairs and landed on my knees. I quickly got up, brushed my coat and pretended not to be hurt. Then I said out loud to all the people staring at me, "My name is Bond, James Bond."
I bought my friend an elephant for his room. He said "thanks", I said "don't mention it"
I woke up from a car accident to find my hands broken I thought to myself "huh... strange"
Why did the bike fall over? Because it was two tired. 
Did you hear about the bombs? Samsung distributed millions of them. 
A man who'd just died is delivered to a local mortuary. ... and he's wearing an expensive, expertly tailored black suit.
The mortician asks the deceased's wife how she would like the body dressed, pointing out that the man does look good in the black suit he is already wearing.
The widow, however, says that she always thought her husband looked his best in blue, and that she wants him in a blue suit. She gives the mortician a blank check and says, 'I don't care what it costs, but please have my husband in a blue suit for the viewing.'
The woman returns the next day and to her delight, she finds her husband dressed in a gorgeous blue suit with a subtle chalk stripe; the suit fits him perfectly.
She says to the mortician, 'Whatever this cost, I'm very satisfied.. You did an excellent job and I'm very grateful. How much did you spend?'
To her astonishment, the mortician presents her with the blank check, 'There's no charge.'
'No, really, I must compensate you for the cost of that exquisite blue suit,' she says.
'Honestly, ma'am,' the mortician says, 'it cost nothing. You see, a deceased gentleman of about your husband's size was brought in shortly after you left yesterday, and he was wearing an attractive blue suit. I asked his wife if she minded him going to his grave wearing a black suit instead, and she said it made no difference as long as he looked nice.'
'So I just switched the heads.'
A Christmas Joke Three men died on Christmas Eve and were met by Saint Peter at the pearly gates. 'In honor of this holy season' Saint Peter said, 'You must each possess something that symbolizes Christmas to get into heaven.' The Englishman fumbled through his pockets and pulled out a lighter. He flicked it on. 'It's a candle', he said. 'You may pass through the pearly gates' Saint Peter said. The Scotsman reached into his pocket and pulled out a set of keys. He shook them and said, 'They're bells.' Saint Peter said 'You may pass through the pearly gates'. The Irishman started searching desperately through his pockets and finally pulled out a pair of women's panties. St. Peter looked at the man with a raised eyebrow and asked, 'And just what do those symbolize?' The Irishman replied, 'These are Carol's' 
What if I won with the lottery I asked my wife once: "What would you do if I won with the lottery?" 
She said: "Cash half of it and leave."
I said: "Here you go, 5 dollars!" 
Did you hear about the guy whose left arm and left leg got chopped off? He died.
[OC] Are vegetarians allowed to have pudding? If so how can they have pudding if they don't eat their meat?
A new couple start fooling around... After a bit the man sticks two fingers inside the woman's vagina and starts turning them to the right.

"What are you doing!?" she asks puzzled.

"To be honest, the first time we had sex I thought you were a little loose," he responds "and as the old saying goes: righty tighty".
Who's a cow's favorite scientist? Neil the-grass Tyson.
A woman walks into a bar and he sees a man sitting by the bar, drinking his beer.

The woman observes the man as he drinks his beer, and when he gets up to leave, the woman approaches him.

Woman: "Do you come here regularly?"

Man: "Yes."

Woman: "And how many times do you come here per week?"

Man: "Every day."

Woman: "And how many beers do you drink every time you come here?"

Man: "About 3."

Woman: "How long have you been coming here for?"

Man: "About 5 years."

Woman: "So you've come here every day of the year, which is 365 days, times 5 years, so 1825 days. You drink 3 beers every day, which is 5475 beers in the last 1825 days. And each beer is 15$, so that's 82125$. If you didn't drink beer for the last 5 years, you could have bought a Ferrari by now!"

Man: "Do you drink beer?"

Woman: "No."

Man: "Then where's your Ferrari?"
The city busses here are so filthy I Cant even finish jackin' off,  im so disgusted.
What's the difference between jelly and jam? Nobody would name their band Pearl Jelly.
A man calls customer service... A man calls the customer service department of a cookie company because he was unsatisfied with their product and would like his money to be returned back to him. A sales representative answers his call:


"Hello, sir. I'm Sandy, sales representative from So 'n' So Cookie Company. How may I help you?"


"Well, Sandy," the man began. "I bought one of your products the other day from the supermarket, and after eating them, I wasn't completely satisfied with it, so I would like to have my money back, please."


"Before I process your request, sir," Sandy started. "May I ask why you were not satisfied with our cookies?"


"Well, Sandy," the man said. "After eating the whole box of cookies, I found that it wasn't really filling."
What's something a white person says a lot, but a black person never says? Hi dad!
A drunken man staggers into a Catholic Church A drunken man staggers into a Catholic Church and sits down in a confession box and says nothing. The bewildered priest coughs to attract his attention, but still the man says nothing. The priest then knocks on the wall three times in a final attempt to get the man to speak, and finally the drunk replies: "No use knockin' mate - there's no paper in this one either!!"
I've got a friend who's fallen in love with two school bags... He's bisatchel.          
Do you have a brother named Humphrey? Because I saw your mom on the corner yelling "Humphrey! Humphrey!"
Humility is one of my best qualities. I'm probably the most humble person I know; I could talk about my humility for hours.
A mother discusses her son with her husband "Honey, I think our son got some bad influence at his school... the other day, he was angry to me and called me a 'bitch'!"
The father was angered: "That son of a bitch..."

----

In a later occasion, the mother told the son that his father has grounded him for being a naughty boy: he may not play his console game for 1 month full.

The boy was livid: "Motherfucker..."
University Administrators. It seems that there were two University administrators who went hunting and fishing in Alaska. They flew into Fairbanks and looked for a floatplane to fly them further into the interior, to a special lake where the hunting and fishing were said to be excellent.
They could not find anyone willing to fly into the selected lake, as it was small with many snags and rocks. They finally found a pilot who would take on the job for an extra $5,000. 
They packed in their gear and they were off for an event of a lifetime. They got to the lake and were able to land, with some difficulty due to the snags and rocks in the lake. They arranged to be picked up in a week and the floatplane returned to Fairbanks.
The next week was grand. They each caught a record size lake trout; shot a moose and an elk. When the floatplane returned they attempted to load their gear and the trout, moose and elk. The pilot would not let them pack all of their trophies, as it would cause the plane to be overloaded.
The administrators indicated that they must have the trophies as they were administrators and no one would believe their stories unless they had proof of their adventures. 
They agreed, after giving the pilot an extra $6,000, that they would leave their gear and take out only the trophies. The pilot would return later for the gear that was being left at the lake.
The pilot was still concerned about the weight in the plane and taxied to the far end of the lake and gunned the motor. They rocketed across the lake but the plane was not becoming airborne as they approached the trees. The plane came off of the water and then slammed into the trees. 
After a few minutes one of the administrators crawled out of the plane and made his way to a large rock on which he stood to evaluate their situation. A voice came from the plane “how far did we make it?”.

The first administrator answered, “About a hundred yards further than last year.”
My friend and I often laugh about how competitive we are... But I laugh more
What kind of music venues do gun lovers like the most? Carry OK
To Dig. I dig.

We dig.

He dig.

She dig.

They dig.

It's not a very beautiful poem, but it's very deep!
A joke for alcoholics…. This drunk is sitting in a rocking chair in front of the fire, when the rocking chair knocks against an empty bottle of whiskey. He picks it up and hurling it in the fireplace yells. “You cost me my dignity and self-respect!”

A while later another empty bottle comes to notice on the coffee table. Again it is hurled in to the fire “you cost me the love of my family!”

Another empty is found on the floor and hurled with a “you………cost me my health and ruined my finances!”

The drunks eye falls on another empty, he grabs it and is about to hurl it in to the fire when he notices about 2 sips worth left in the bottom. “YOU!!!.........this has got fuck all to do with you".  


Another "guy goes to a monastery" joke - an oldie but a goodie This is an old one, so apologies if its been here before (I haven't seen it yet, but I don't check /r/jokes every day). I'm a bit bored at the moment, so I've embellished it a bit! enjoy :)

So, this guy is hiking in the Himalayas, as you do, and, as he's hiking up the narrow, rock-strewn paths, he realises that it is getting late, and darkness comes early in the mountains, and he was still some distance from the next town. He starts walking more quickly, but it became dark and he couldn't see much in front of him. Just as the panic was setting in, he rounded a corner and lo, there was a light in the darkness. A monastery, not on any map, appearing, just as it was sorely needed.
The guy thankfully stumbles up to the great door and bangs on it loudly. After a short time, it slowly creaked open to reveal a large, almost jolly, monk with a huge smile on his face. "Come in, weary traveller", he says. Wondering how the happy monk knew English, but not wanting to look a gift horse in the mouth, the traveller thankfully entered the monastery.
"Please join us for dinner," the monk said, with that warming and happy smile. "it will be, as always, a very joyous and happy occasion".
"Thank you so much" says the traveller, as he is shown to a room to refresh himself before the meal.

At the meal, held in the large Hall, with all of the monastery's inhabitants together, the traveller is seated as a guest of honour, next to the Abbot himself. Small talk ensues as they partake of the feast set before them.
All of the monks seem very happy and friendly. Our weary traveller is confused (thinking monasteries were supposed to be quiet, dull affairs), but again, doesn't want to ask any awkward questions, and so is happy to go along.
All of a sudden, one of the monks at a lower table stands up and says loudly, "24!". The other monks start chuckling, and nodding their heads in agreement. One or two even bang their cups on the table.
Another monk then stands up and says, "37". A bit more obvious a reaction this time - the monks chuckle more loudly, a few laughing out loud and more cup-on-table banging. Even the Abbot chuckles to himself.
A third monk, "65!". Loud laughter, patting on backs, more cup on table bangings, even a few feet stompings - clearly the monks are having a  good time!
The traveller, however, is as confused as all hell! Just as he was about to ask the Abbot what was going on, the Abbot himself stood up and shouted "17!". More laughter, more appreciation, clapping and table banging. The monks were loving it!
The Abbot sat down, and saw the confused look on the traveller's face. "My son", he said. "We love a good laugh, here at the monastery. We tell jokes at dinner time, and we all enjoy each others' company. In fact, we tell the jokes so often, that we ended up just numbering them - it makes it so much easier to just say the number of the joke. Why don't you try it?"

The traveller thinks for a bit and then stands up and shouts out "45". More laughter, more feet stomping, nods of appreciation, comments of 'our guest is joining our traditions" and that sort of thing.
The traveller is quite pleased with the response, and thinks to himself, "I'll have another go!"
So he stands up and shouts out "112!!".
There was a moment of shocked silence, and then a deafening roar as every monk there laughed loudly, banging on the tables, stomping their feet, patting each other on the back, pointing to our traveller in obvious appreciation. Some even wiped tears of laughter from their eyes.
The traveller sat down again next to the Abbot, feeling quite proud of himself and turned to the Abbot saying, "They liked that one, did they?"
"Oh yes," said the Abbot, "That was a good one - they haven't heard that one before!"
At A Wedding Party At a wedding party recently somebody yelled, "All married people please stand next to the one person who has made your life worth living."

The bartender was almost crushed to death...


I found this joke on the website shareitsfunny
A baptist at the gates of heaven asks to see hell. So a Baptist dies and goes to heaven.

The Baptist goes to St. John, who is guarding the gates of heaven, and asks,
"You know, I'm just little bit curious. What does hell look like?"

St. John points off toward a cliff in the distance and says, "Just go to that cliff over there and look down. You'll be able to see it from there."

So the Baptist walks over to the cliff, looks downward, and says, "Hey John, are you sure this is hell? This doesn't look so bad. There's green grass everywhere!"

St. John, taken aback, sprints to the cliff, looks at hell, and says,

"You've gotta be kidding me! Those damn Mormons are irrigating again!"  
What's the best way to carve wood? Whittle by whittle.
Why did the mexican girl get pregnant? Because her teacher told her to do an essay
Lone Ranger and Tonto are riding across the plains When Tonto stops suddenly, climbs down, and puts his ear to the ground. 

Lone Ranger waits a few minutes, then asks Tonto, "What is it?"

Tonto said, "Buffalo come."

Lone Ranger asks, "How can you tell?"

Tonto replied, "Ear sticky."
Why can't Jesus eat M&Ms? Because he isn't real. 
It's a good thing Harambe got shot.... Dicks out for dead kids just doesn't sound good 
A Psychic punches a blind man. The blind man didn't see it coming, but the psychic did.
*Knock Knock* Come in....
a little boy's Christmas A little boy went to see Santa. 
He was sitting on Santas lap and Santa says to the boy, "I know what you want for Christmas, you want a B O O K (Santa spells the word book, with each letter he taps the boy on the nose)
Little boy replies, "No. Thats not what I want for Christmas". 
Santa says, "Then I know what you want for Christmas," Santa taps the boy on the nose and spells, "B I K E".
Again the little boy says," No. That is not what I want for Christmas".
Santa says, "Then what do you want for Christmas?"
Boy says" I want some P U S S Y and dont try to tell me you havent got any because I can smell it on your finger."

Slept like a log last night... ...woke up in the fireplace...
Hunter joke! Two hunters went out to the forest to hunt one day. While they were resting by a tree, a heavy branch fell and knocked one of the hunters out. The other hunter quickly whips out his phone and calls 911.

"911, what's your emergency?"

"my friend has just gotten knocked out. What should I do?"

"well, let's check if he's dead first."

The hunter's line stays quiet for a moment, and is then followed up by gunshots in the background.

The hunter then comes back to the phone- "What next?"
What's an owl's favorite rock band? Owls personally prefer the track list of Rock Band 2. Just a solid game.
An old man and his wife have gone to bed. After laying on bed for a few minutes, the old man cut a fart and says, "7 points."

His wife rolls over and asks, "What in the world was that?"

The old man says, "Touchdown. I'm ahead 7 to nothing."

A few minutes later, the wife lets one go and says, "Touchdown, tie score."

After about ten minutes, the old man farts again and says, "Touchdown, I'm ahead 14 to 7.

Now starting to get into this, the wife quickly farts again and says, "Touchdown, tie score."

The old man strains really hard, but to no avail -- he can't fart.

So not to be outdone by his wife, he gives it everything he has and strains real hard to get out just one more fart.

Straining, the old man tries so hard, he poops in the bed.

The wife asks, "Now what in the world was that?"

The old man replies, "Half-time, switch sides!"
Hillary Clinton's recent case of pneumonia just goes to show There's only one candidate who can dodge a draft. 
Why'd the scarecrow get promoted? He was outstanding in his field.
Sad to hear of the passing of Liesl von Trapp at the age of 73, going on 74.

A couple of magnets showed their positive side... they got divorced.
Baby come over. I'm coming over.

Using walkie talkies in bed is strange over. 
What do you call a Kansas cover band composed of physicists? Baryon my wayward son!
What does the wife do when her husband is struggling to breathe on the floor? She shoots him again.
An engineer has girlfriend but she lives in other nation ...... .......& that nation is "Imagination"
Went to glasses shop to check my eyes,the worker told me I had estigmatism,I googled it.... Because I was blind on the subject.
I was walking through the park this morning, when I saw a man, standing on a tree branch, with a rope around his neck... I asked him what was happening and he screamed, "After I jump, everyone will dearly miss me when they recall that I hung myself!"

I immediately assured him that that would not be the case, even if he jumped, right there, in front of my very eyes, that's not what people will say!! 

Tears welling in his eyes, he jumped.

As he was jumping, I said, "After you jump, everyone will dearly miss you when they recall that you *hanged* yourself!!"
Bus Driver So a little boy gets on a bus and sits right behind the driver and starts yelling "if my mother was a monkey and my father was a monkey id be a baby monkey"

The driver is getting annoyed and the little boy yells again "if my mother was an elephant and my father was an elephant id be a baby elephant"

This goes on a few more times, the bus driver slams the brakes and turns around to shout at the boy "WHAT IF YOUR MOTHER WAS A HOOKER AND YOUR DAD WAS GAY, WHAT WOULD YOU BE THEN"

The boy replies, "a bus driver"

(Sorry if repost or not funny)

Why is the new Zork game rated M for mature?? I guess it's too grue-some.
When I awoke from the accident and they told me my fingers were broken... it was hard to grasp.
Duke the dog A young man arrived a little early to pick up his date. The young man was invited in and was asked to wait in the living room with the young woman's father.
Father is not very friendly and the family dog comes over to the nervous young man and sits down. 
Being nervous the young man has a terrible case of gas and takes a chance and releases some. 
The father loudly says' "Duke" The young man is releaved thinking the father thinks the dog passed gas. So the young man releases some more. Again the father shouts "Duke!!". The young man is beginning to feel better and he passes gas one more time and the father says "Duke, get over here before he shits on you!"

Why do Java programmers need glasses? Because they can't C#. 
I called Robin Hood the other day He was robin' the hood.
A man goes into a swimming pool. A man goes into a swimming pool, wearing a swimming cap. Another man, sunbathing on the side shouts to him: "Are you a Jew? Be careful of the chlorine in the pool!"
What's the difference between 'Oh' and 'Oooh'? About three inches
Where did the racist get his fruit? From the bigo-tree
Three guys walk into a bar together... You would've thought at least one of them would have seen it! 
Everyone knows the suicide hotlines in the Middle East connect directly to terrorist recruiters.
What did the dog say after a hard day at work ? "Today sure was ruff"



Read that today on my university's art wall and made me smile a bit , thought i'd share it :P
Donald Trump has announced that his first action as President will be to reintroduce the Bellamy Salute, not just for the Pledge of Allegiance, but also for the National Anthem and for every Presidential Address.  
There'll be *Heil Toupee*.  

I only drink twice a year When it's my birthday, and when it's not
Which profession has the worst sense of humour? Well, chiropodists like *corny* jokes.  
But opticians like them *cornea*.  
I hate long jokes. At least your penis is short. 
How high can you kick a baby? It depends. Are you inside or outside?
Why did the faucet turn on? It was feeling _wet_.
What's the difference between Chris Christie and Ivanka Trump submissively bent over Donald's bed? Boobs!

Ok wait never mind they are the same.
Why did Barty Crouch Jr. quit drinking? Because it was making him moody.
A pirate has a steering wheel attached to his crotch. As he walks down the street someone notices and asks "Doesn't that hurt?"

The pirate replies, "Arr, it drives me nuts."
how many /r/jokes user does it take to repost a joke? three. 
one to actually do it, one to complain that it has been done before, and another one to repost the said repost 
Ever since I installed Adblocker Plus things haven't been going so well.. All of a sudden chicks in my area are no longer interested in me.
I couldn't imagine my parents having sex So last night I hid in their closet and watched
"No one cares about the jews" "Yeah, they do"

"No they don't. During the holocaust i killed 3 jews and one clown"

"Why one clown?"

"See? No one cares about the jews"
What do you call a gorilla in water? Harambait.
At the supermarket I saw a man and a woman wrapped in a barcode... I asked, "Are you two an item?"
I can't even... ...so I guess I'm odd. 
What do you get if you microwave welsh horse crap? PooptyPong.
What's you experience with "Friends with benefits"? The close thing I came to having “ friends with benefits” was ..........



convincing my friend to bring food for me daily.
I invited Miley Cyrus to my house. "She came in like a wrecking ball!" 
It's so cold outside I saw a politician with his hands in his own pockets. 
[NSFW] Why don't pedophiles ever win races? They're always coming in a little behind.
What do you call a muslim holocaust? Sand Sanitizer.
A few hours ago it raining like hell outside that my windows was all fogged up. But "I can see clearly now the rain has gone!" 
An infinite number of mathematicians walk into the bar. The first one says, "give me a pint."
The seconds says, "give me two pints"
The third one says, "give three pints."
Barman says, "Alright! I get it!". He pours 1/12th of a pint back into the barrel.

Then, the barman says, "OK, you guys owe me a dollar each." He then hands the mathematicians 50 cents.
What is the most common french saying? "nous abandonnons"
A bear was shitting in the woods. A beat was shitting in the woods when a rabbit walked past. The bear asked the rabbit "does shit stick to your fur?" and the rabbit said "no it does not, why do you ask?". and then the bear picked up the rabbit and wiped his ass with him
Today my dad and I were talking about hilary clinton potentially becoming president... And my dad said, people don't like hilary because she's secretive.

And I said, what woman isn't?

*M I Rite?*
A fisherman's wife gave birth to twin boys. When the babies were side by side, they always looked in opposite directions, so they were named Forward and Away. 

Years later, the fisherman took his sons fishing, but they didn't return. Months passed, and the wife finally spotted her husband plodding sadly up the beach. 

He explained to her that during their trip, Forward had hooked an enormous fish. He had struggled for hours, when suddenly the fish pulled Forward into the water and they never saw him again. 

*"That's just terrible!"* his wife said. 

*"It was terrible all right,"* said the fisherman. 

*"But you should have seen the one that got Away!"*
What's the difference between a Pizza and an onion? No one cries when you cut up Pizza.
What do you call an "Asian" that loves using moisturizer? Laotian.
Why was the clumsy vegetable farmer a good dj? Because he dropped the beet.
Even people who are good for nothing have the capacity to bring a smile to your face. For instance, when you push them down the stairs.
A banker friend of mine had a breakup recently He lost interest.
"This year I had a dog for Christmas" "That's funny, we had a turkey like every other year"
What do you call it when a lemon jerks off her own brother until he chafes? Inzest 
I attempted to get a photo of the fog yesterday... I mist.
A man killed a cop.... Then he called 911 and said : 
"Guys, you're 910 from now on..."
Why does T-Pain always look well rested? Because he is a NAPPY BOY!!!
What is the difference between a priest and a pimple? A pimple waits until you are 13 to come on your face.
A blonde learned she was colorblind She looked at an example of what colorblind people see when they look at an Ishihara test. 
Why did the banana go to the hospital? It wasn't peeling well.
Hitler was a bad guy... But then again he did kill hitler. But he also killed the guy that killed hitler, so...
I read a book about the dangers of drinking the other day, and i have to tell you, i think it scared me so much im done... From now on, no more reading
Two termites go on a date.. Waiter: what would you like to order sir?
Termite: Table for two.
Birthday present A little boy's parents asked what he wanted for his upcoming birthday.

The boy thought about it and simply replied "I wanna watch"


So they let him
An Indian farmer is speaking to a farmer from Texas... The Texan asked "How large is your farm?" 
The Indian replied, "See that light pole? My farm is about from where standing to there. How about yours?"
The Texan nodded and said, "If you wake up at the crack of dawn and you begin to drive, and you drive and drive and drive, at about noon, you will reach the end of my property line."
The Indian famer chuckled and said, "Yeah, I've owned cars like that too." 
How many therapists does it take to change a lightbulb One... but the lightbulb has to want to change.

[Request] Drone x Halloween x Bathroom joke Something about a delivery drone being intercepted on the way to deliver the toilet paper by a witch on a broomstick?

...damnit.
A ghost is helping me recover from an injury..... I guess you could call him a metaphysical therapist. 
A Trucker Hates Lawyers so Much That When he Sees Them he Always Runs Them Over One day he sees a priest hitchhiking and decides to give a ride to the holy man. As they go along the road, the trucker spots a lawyer by the side of the road and steers to run him over. At the last minute he remembers the priest in the truck and swerves away hoping to avoid judgment of his sins.
He says "I'm sorry father, I don't know what came over me!"
The priest replies, "Don't worry, I got him with the door!"
Now that Donald Trump having a real shot at the presidency, who is most afraid? ​Every Juan!
Three Lawyers and Three Engineers were Traveling by Train to Conference At the station, each lawyer bought a ticket whereas the engineers bought only one ticket between them.
"How are you going to travel on a single ticket?" asked a lawyer.
"Wait and watch" answered one of the engineers.
When they boarded the train, the lawyers took their seats, but the three engineers crammed into a toilet and closed the door behind them. Shortly after the train started, the ticket collector arrived. He knocked on the toilet door and asked, "Ticket please." The door opened just a crack and a single arm emerged with a ticket in hand. The ticket collector took it and moved on. Seeing this, the lawyers decided to the same thing on the return trip.
So when they got to the station, they bought only one ticket. To their astonishment, the engineers didn't buy any.
"How are you going to travel without a ticket?" asked one of the perplexed lawyers.
"Wait and watch" answered an engineer.
In the train, the three engineers crammed into a toilet and the three lawyers into another nearby. Soon after the train started, one of the engineers got out of the toilet and walked to one where the lawyers were hiding. He knocked on the door and said, "Ticket, please."
A way of getting the detail of sexy girl near to me Now I am in a room with 3 sexy girls and I only know two of them, 
I am planning use Pythagorean theorem to get the details of third beautiful sexy girls...
Did you hear what happened when the Pope went to mount Olive? Popeye beat the shit out of him. 
My Dream is to Become the World's Best Procrastinator... But I'll start chasing my dreams another day, I don't feel like it now. 
Did you know that the largest eggs in the world are laid by sharks... ....And the largest woman in the world is laid by your dad.
How long does it take a black woman to shit? 9 months!
Why was six afraid of seven? Six hasn't been the same since he left Vietnam. Every time he closes his eyes, he's sees Charlie hiding in the darkness of the forest. Not that you could ever see those bastards, mind you. They were fast and they knew their way around the jungle. He remembers the looks on the boy's faces when they walked into that village and... oh Jesus. He shouldn't think about that now. Sometimes he still hears Tex's slow southern drawl. He remembers the smell of Brooklyn's cigarettes. He always had a pack of Luckys. But the boys are gone now... he knows that. It's--it's just that he forgets sometimes. And sometimes the way that seven looks at him... it makes him think. Sets him on edge. And he feels like he's back there... In the jungle... In the darkness. 

Seven also has a hook for a hand, which is very scary.
GATHER ROUND! Lets tell a story one word at a time. Lets tell a story one word at a time beginning with:

THE

Hopefully this turns into a joke post or the most captivating story ever. 
My Mom burned my Hawaiian pizza today... I guess she should have put the oven on aloha setting...
Can orphans... eat at a family restaurant?
I broke my arm in a couple places; know what the doctor said? "Stay out of those places!"
What's Harambe's favourite retail store? Target
What do you call four black guys hanging in a barn? Antique farm equipment. 
What's blue and hangs from a tree in my yard? Its my nigger, I can paint him whatever color I want.
What do you call an obese suicide bomber? Fatty fatty boom boom
what does Geico and your girlfriend have in common? Shes so easy a cave man could do her. 
What do you call a midget with no teeth A gum job.
Today I quit smoking cold turkey Turns out hot turkey is much better for smoking.
It's true that blacks can be racist too! But just like everything else in life, whites are always better at it. 
Someone told me my clothes were gay. I said, “Yeah, they’ve just come out of the closet.”
I don't see gender. People tell me I'm male, and I believe them, because no one ever compliments me.
Why didn't Jesus have any children? He only got nailed by guys ;) 
Want to be moved for free? Just be Jewish , live in 1940s Europe , and be willing to live a ghetto.
What did the cholo say when two houses fell on top of him? Get off me homes!
A guy walks into a dentist's office and says, "I think I'm a moth." The dentist replies "You shouldn't be here. You should be seeing a psychiatrist..."
The guys replies, "I am seeing a psychiatrist."
The dentist says, "Well then what are you doing here?"
And the guy says, "Your light was on."
Why don't blind people skydive? It scares their dogs too much
Only people who paid attention in history class will remember... What work of ancient law is the Roman Twelve Tables similar to?

The Code of Harambe
What do you call a hookers fart? A prostitoot
You hold the power to save them... With all your honor and dignity, what would you do? Please don't answer without giving it serious thought. By giving an honest answer you will be able to test where you stand morally.

The test features an unlikely, completely fictional situation, where you will have to make a decision one way or the other. Please scroll down slowly and consider each line - this is important for the test to work accurately.

You're in Florida ... in Miami, to be exact. There is great chaos going on around you, caused by a hurricane and severe floods. There are huge masses of water all over you. You are a news photographer and you are in the middle of this great disaster. The situation is nearly hopeless. You're trying to shoot very impressive photos. There are houses and people floating around you, disappearing into the water. Nature is showing all its destructive power.

Suddenly you see a man and woman in the water, fighting for their lives, trying not to be taken away by the masses of water and mud. You move closer. Somehow they look familiar.

Suddenly you know who they are - it's Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton, caught in the storm surge while leaving the debate!

At the same time you notice that the raging waters are about to take them away, forever. You have two options. You can save them or you can take the best photo of your life. So you can save the lives of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, or you can shoot a Pulitzer prize winning photo, a unique photo displaying the deaths of two of the most powerful people in the United States.

And here's the question (please give an honest answer):

Would you select color film, or rather go with the simplicity of classic black and white?
Did you guys hear that Republicans are trying to end racism? Shit my time machine is broken again.
The Italian Chef Did you hear about the Italian Chef? 

He pasta away 
What's the difference between a chick pea and a potato? You would pay to have a potato on you...
The past, the present, and the future walk into a bar. It was tense.
Monk... A man is driving down the road and breaks down near a monastery. He goes to the monastery, knocks on the door, and says, “My car broke down. Do you think I could stay the night?”

The monks graciously accept him, feed him dinner, even fix his car. As the man tries to fall asleep, he hears a strange sound.

The next morning, he asks the monks what the sound was, but they say, “We can’t tell you. You’re not a monk.”

The man is disappointed but thanks them anyway and goes about his merry way.

Some years later, the same man breaks down in front of the same monastery.

The monks accept him, feed him, even fix his car. That night, he hears the same strange noise that he had heard years earlier.

The next morning, he asks what it is, but the monks reply, “We can’t tell you. You’re not a monk.”

The man says, “All right, all right. I’m *dying* to know. If the only way I can find out what that sound was is to become a monk, how do I become a monk?”

The monks reply, “You must travel the earth and tell us how many blades of grass there are and the exact number of sand pebbles. When you find these numbers, you will become a monk.”

The man sets about his task. Forty-five years later, he returns and knocks on the door of the monastery. He says, “I have traveled the earth and have found what you have asked for. There are 145,236,284,232 blades of grass and 231,281,219,999,129,382 sand pebbles on the earth.”

The monks reply, “Congratulations. You are now a monk. We shall now show you the way to the sound.”

The monks lead the man to a wooden door, where the head monk says, “The sound is right behind that door.”

The man reaches for the knob, but the door is locked. He says, “Real funny. May I have the key?”

The monks give him the key, and he opens the door.

Behind the wooden door is another door made of stone.

The man demands the key to the stone door.

The monks give him the key, and he opens it, only to find a door made of ruby.

He demands another key from the monks, who provide it.

Behind that door is another door, this one made of sapphire.

So it went until the man had gone through doors of emerald, silver, topaz, and amethyst.

Finally, the monks say, “This is the last key to the last door.”

The man is relieved to no end.

He unlocks the door, turns the knob, and behind that door he is amazed to find the source of that strange sound.

But I can’t tell you what it is because you’re not a monk.
How to stop rape? With consent!
A man goes up to an indian woman... he says "you must be ladesh?"  
she goes "what do you mean?"  
"well this summer, im goin to Bangladesh"
Friend: How do you spell "SHOP"? Me: S-H-O-P 

Friend: How do you say it?

Me: "Shop" 

Friend: What do you do when you get to a green light?
How do you think the unthinkable? With an itheberg
A man walks into a bar And it really fucking hurt actually. 
A politician dies... And ends up standing in front of the pearly gates. Saint Peter looks at him for a second, flicks through his book, and finds his name.

"So, you're a politician..." "Well, yes, is that a problem?" "Oh no, no problem. But we've recently adopted a new system for people in your line of work, and unfortunately you will have to spend a day in Hell. After that however, you're free to choose where you want to spend eternity!"

"Wait, I have to spend a day in Hell??" says the politician. "Them's the rules" Says St Peter, clicks his fingers, and WOOMPH, the guy dissapears... And awakes, curled up with his hands over his eyes, knowing he's in Hell. Cautiously, he listens for the screams, sniffs the air for brimstone, and finds... Nothing. Just the smell of, is that fabric softener? And cut grass, this can't be right?

"Open your eyes!" says a voice. "C'mon, wakey wakey, we've only got 24 hours!". Nervously, he uncovers his eyes, looks around, and sees he's in a hotel room. A nice one too. Wait, this is a penthouse suite... And there's a smiling man in a suit, holding a martini. "Who are you??" The politician asks. "Well, I'm Satan!" says the man, handing him the drink and helping him to his feet. "Welcome to Hell!" "Wait, this is Hell? But... Where's all the pain and suffering?" he asks. Satan throws him a wink. "Oh, we've been a bit mis-represented over the years, it's a long story. Anyway, this is your room! The minibar is of course free, as is the room service, there's extra towels next to the hot-tub, and if you need anything, just call reception. But enough of this! It's a beautiful day, and if you'd care to look outside..." Slightly stunned by the opulent surroundings, the man wanders over to the floor-to-ceiling windows through which the sun is glowing, looks far down, and sees a group of people cheering and waving at him from a golf course. "It's one of 5 pro-level courses on site, and there's another 6 just a few minutes drive out past the beach and harbour!" says Satan, answering his unasked question. So they head down in the lift, walk out through the glittering lobby where everyone waves and welcomes the man, as Satan signs autographs and cherrily talks shop with the laughing staff. And as he walks out, he sees the group on the golf course are made up of every one of his old friends, people he's admired for years but never met or worked with, and people whose work he's admired but died long before his career started. And out of the middle of this group walks his wife, with a massive smile and the body she had when she was 20, who throws her arms around him and plants a delicate kiss on his cheek. Everyone cheers and applauds, and as they slap him on the back and trade jokes, his worst enemy arrives, as a 2 foot tall goblin-esque caddy. He spends the day in the bright sunshine on the course, having the time of his life laughing at jokes and carrying important discussions, putting the world to rights with his friends while holding his delighted wife next to him as she gazes lovingly at him. Later, they return to the hotel for dinner and have an enormous meal, perfectly cooked, which descends into a food-fight when someone accidentally throws a bread roll at the next table (where Ghandi is having a game of truth-or-dare with Marylin Monroe). As everyone is falling about laughing and flinging breadsticks at each other, his wife whispers in his ear... And they return to their penthouse suite, and spend the rest of the night making love like they did on their honeymoon. After 6 hours of intense passion, the man falls deep into the 100% Egyptian cotton pillows, and falls into a deep and happy sleep... And is woken up by St Peter. "So, that was Hell. Wasn't what you were expecting, I bet?" "No sir!" says the man. "So then" says St Peter "you can make your choice. It's Hell, which you saw, or Heaven, which has choral singing, talking to God, white robes, and so on". "Well... I know this sounds strange, but on balance, I think I'd prefer Hell" says the politician. "Not a problem, we totally understand! Enjoy!" Says St Peter, and clicks his fingers again.

The man wakes up in total darkness, the stench of ammonia filling the air and distant screams the only noise. As he adjusts, he can see the only light is from belches of flame far away, illuminating the ragged remains of people being tortured or burning in a sulphurous ocean. A sudden bolt of lightning reveals Satan next to him, wearing the same suit as before and grinning, holding a soldering iron in one hand and a coil of razor-wire in the other. "What's this??" He cries. "Where's the hotel?? Where's my wife??? Where's the minibar, the golf-courses, the pool, the restaurant, the free drinks and the sunshine???"
"Ah", says Satan. "You see, yesterday, we were campaigning. But today, you voted..."And ends up standing in front of the pearly gates. Saint Peter looks at him for a second, flicks through his book, and finds his name.

"So, you're a politician..." "Well, yes, is that a problem?" "Oh no, no problem. But we've recently adopted a new system for people in your line of work, and unfortunately you will have to spend a day in Hell. After that however, you're free to choose where you want to spend eternity!"

"Wait, I have to spend a day in Hell??" says the politician. "Them's the rules" Says St Peter, clicks his fingers, and WOOMPH, the guy dissapears... And awakes, curled up with his hands over his eyes, knowing he's in Hell. Cautiously, he listens for the screams, sniffs the air for brimstone, and finds... Nothing. Just the smell of, is that fabric softener? And cut grass, this can't be right?

"Open your eyes!" says a voice. "C'mon, wakey wakey, we've only got 24 hours!". Nervously, he uncovers his eyes, looks around, and sees he's in a hotel room. A nice one too. Wait, this is a penthouse suite... And there's a smiling man in a suit, holding a martini. "Who are you??" The politician asks. "Well, I'm Satan!" says the man, handing him the drink and helping him to his feet. "Welcome to Hell!" "Wait, this is Hell? But... Where's all the pain and suffering?" he asks. Satan throws him a wink. "Oh, we've been a bit mis-represented over the years, it's a long story. Anyway, this is your room! The minibar is of course free, as is the room service, there's extra towels next to the hot-tub, and if you need anything, just call reception. But enough of this! It's a beautiful day, and if you'd care to look outside..." Slightly stunned by the opulent surroundings, the man wanders over to the floor-to-ceiling windows through which the sun is glowing, looks far down, and sees a group of people cheering and waving at him from a golf course. "It's one of 5 pro-level courses on site, and there's another 6 just a few minutes drive out past the beach and harbour!" says Satan, answering his unasked question. So they head down in the lift, walk out through the glittering lobby where everyone waves and welcomes the man, as Satan signs autographs and cherrily talks shop with the laughing staff. And as he walks out, he sees the group on the golf course are made up of every one of his old friends, people he's admired for years but never met or worked with, and people whose work he's admired but died long before his career started. And out of the middle of this group walks his wife, with a massive smile and the body she had when she was 20, who throws her arms around him and plants a delicate kiss on his cheek. Everyone cheers and applauds, and as they slap him on the back and trade jokes, his worst enemy arrives, as a 2 foot tall goblin-esque caddy. He spends the day in the bright sunshine on the course, having the time of his life laughing at jokes and carrying important discussions, putting the world to rights with his friends while holding his delighted wife next to him as she gazes lovingly at him. Later, they return to the hotel for dinner and have an enormous meal, perfectly cooked, which descends into a food-fight when someone accidentally throws a bread roll at the next table (where Ghandi is having a game of truth-or-dare with Marylin Monroe). As everyone is falling about laughing and flinging breadsticks at each other, his wife whispers in his ear... And they return to their penthouse suite, and spend the rest of the night making love like they did on their honeymoon. After 6 hours of intense passion, the man falls deep into the 100% Egyptian cotton pillows, and falls into a deep and happy sleep... And is woken up by St Peter. "So, that was Hell. Wasn't what you were expecting, I bet?" "No sir!" says the man. "So then" says St Peter "you can make your choice. It's Hell, which you saw, or Heaven, which has choral singing, talking to God, white robes, and so on". "Well... I know this sounds strange, but on balance, I think I'd prefer Hell" says the politician. "Not a problem, we totally understand! Enjoy!" Says St Peter, and clicks his fingers again.

The man wakes up in total darkness, the stench of ammonia filling the air and distant screams the only noise. As he adjusts, he can see the only light is from belches of flame far away, illuminating the ragged remains of people being tortured or burning in a sulphurous ocean. A sudden bolt of lightning reveals Satan next to him, wearing the same suit as before and grinning, holding a soldering iron in one hand and a coil of razor-wire in the other. "What's this??" He cries. "Where's the hotel?? Where's my wife??? Where's the minibar, the golf-courses, the pool, the restaurant, the free drinks and the sunshine???"
"Ah", says Satan. "You see, yesterday, we were campaigning. But today, you voted..."
What's Hitlers favourite Drum & Bass tune? The Nein.
What do you call an non alkaline Jewish family. Hasidic
My house was haunted, so I got it exorcised by an expert. Unfortunately, I couldn't afford the payment and it got repossessed.
Your chocolate slice tastes like rum balls, but without the rum. It just tastes like balls 
Where does Moses get his coffee? Hebrews it.
A man comes home one day and says, "Guess what honey?! Pack for vacation, I won the lottery!" The wife squeals with delight and says, "That's great! Should I pack for the mountains or the beach?" 

He says, "I don't care, just get out!"
What does the neckbeard mosquito say to the female mosquito? M'laria
Why is Edward Cullen so pale? There's no sunshine in closets.
"Sarah went crazy at me this morning for using her toothbrush. Does anyone else know how to get dog shit off their sneakers?" "Sarah went crazy at me this morning for using her toothbrush. Does anyone else know how to get dog shit off their sneakers?"
What do the new Iphone 7 headphones like to do? Jack off.
How many Dallas Cowboys fans does it take to change a lightbulb? They don't. They just talk about when it did work.
Donald Trump and Hilary Clinton are in a plane crash, who survives America
A guy asked a friend how he can get over his social anxiety. His friend said to try *alcohol* but he said that he wanted a long term change. To this, his friend said **alcoholism**.
New info regarding the Chelsea explosion somebody dropped their Samsung 7
Why do black people have white hands? Cause before God painted them, He told them...

"PUT YOUR HANDS AGAINST THE WALL!!!!"
What's it called when you're killing time at work hiding in the bathroom? Stalling.
Little Johnny is sent home for having sex with his teacher His mother is appalled and screams at him and says "JUST WAIT UNTIL YOUR FATHER GETS HOME!"

His father gets home and after speaking to his mom takes Little Johnny into the backyard for a talk...

"Don't tell your mother this Little Johnny, but I'm really proud of you for having sex with the teacher! Why don't we go into town now so I can buy you that bike you've been eyeing?"

To which little Johnny replies,

"Not now Dad, my ass still hurts."


2017 "Did you just assume my species?" 
This kneeling during the national anthem thing is getting really out of hand. Now even the competitors of the Paralympics are doing it.
What type of road race do Donald Trump supporters run? 3 K's
Someone called me racist for saying "black paint" Apparently the politically correct term is "Tyrone, please paint the fence."
My jokes are like straws They suck.
An old communist priest saw a bright light. "Jesus, is it you? Have you come to take me to your kingdom?" he said Turns out he was just hallucinating because religion is the opiate of the masses. 
What happens when two pastries divorce? They have a custardy battle
Why is Miley Cyrus refusing to walk the Emmys red carpet? Because she doesn't have a single thing to wear!
What did the baby say to its mother after breastfeeding? Thanks for the mammaries!
Ever since the news came out about Samsung.... Their phones have been blowing up.
My dad died on 9/11... He was a terrible pilot.
Why can't a nose be 12" long? It would be a foot.
Why do you never see Hippo's hiding in trees? Because they're so good at it.
A fly drops 6 inches. There's a fly hovering above a lake just out of the reach of a fish. 
The fly drops 6 inches so the fish jumped out of the water and eats it.
Unfortunately there is a bear waiting for that fish and the bear snags the fish.
Across the lake on the shore there's a hunter who is aiming his rifle at that bear.
He misses because a mouse is eating his crackers and that little noise was enough to ruin his aim.
The cat that has been stalking the mouse  then tries to pounce on the mouse but misses and ends up in the water.

Moral of the story: When the fly drops 6 inches the pussy is sure to get wet.
Where do suicide bombers go where they die? Everywhere. 
I hate it when people.... write and open ended title and you have to open up the thread to see the text.
How do you know your dog's cancer is really bad? If the vet says it's mutt-astasized.
Little Johnny Little April was not the best student in Sunday school. Usually she slept through the class. 

One day the teacher called on her while she was napping, "Tell me, April, who created the universe?" 

When April didn't stir, little Johnny, a boy seated in the chair behind her, took a pin and jabbed her in the rear.  

"GOD ALMIGHTY!" shouted April and the teacher said, "Very good" and April fell back asleep. 

A while later the teacher asked April, "Who is our Lord and Saviour," But, April didn't even stir from her slumber. Once again, Johnny came to the rescue and stuck her again.  

"JESUS CHRIST!" shouted April and the teacher said, "very good," and April fell back to sleep. 

Then the teacher asked April a third question.  "What did Eve say to Adam after she had her twenty-third child?"  And again, Johnny jabbed her with the pin.  

This time April jumped up and shouted, "IF YOU STICK THAT FUCKING THING IN ME ONE MORE TIME, I'LL BREAK IT IN HALF AND STICK IT UP YOUR ARSE!" 

The Teacher fainted.
How do you know you're on the phone with a meth head? When comcast puts them on hold and they don't hang up
I like my coffee like I like my women From Kenya and tastes like warm diarrhea.
What's black, cheap, and not worth a damn? A cup of decaf 
How do you access a watersports/golden shower porn site if you don't know the URL? You just use the IP address
I really hate my partners calling me the wrong name during sex. My name is not "Help" or "Get off me". 
What is a guy with multi-tasking called? Husband.
The difference between a sex maniac and a regular maniac... ...is that a regular maniac slits your throat...
Today I quit drinking for good now I only drink for evil
[Dirty] Some more dirt was mysteriously added to my garden last night... The plot thickens
What do you call a meeting exclusively attended by pine, juniper and fir trees? A coniference. 
What did the pirate say on his eightieth birthday? Aye Matey
A man is walking through a forest and sees a huge hole The whole is really deep. It's huge and dark and seems bottomless, so the man decides to see how deep. 

He throws in a pebble and listens, but it doesn't make a sound. 

He throws in a big stick; still no sound

He throws in a huge tree stump he prised up out of the ground; nothing


Suddenly, a dog comes running by and jumps straight into the hole at alarming speed. 

The man stares into the hole, dumbfounded, when another man walks by and asks "have you seen my dog?"

"Yeah" he replies, "he just jumped in this hole"

"That's funny" the other man replies, "I had him tied to a tree stump"
How are children like cellphones? If you’ve lost one and haven’t found it in a couple days, chances are it’s probably dead.
Why cant train drivers be sentenced to the electric chair? Because they're bad conductors.
Man went to the zoo and... The only animal was a dog. It was a Shih Tzu...
Serious inquiries only 

A friend of mine has Two Tickets for the 2016 Ryder Cup

They are Premier Box Seats plus Airfares and 5* Hotel All Inclusive Accommodation.

He didn't realize when he bought them, that this is the same day as his Wedding Day.

If you're interested and want to go instead of him, it's at St Johns Church, Melbourne at 2.15pm.

Her name is Susan.

She will be the one in the White Dress... 
My Son Kerry and Puppies So I was walking down the street with my son kerry and we seen a couple of dogs having sex. My son being young and all says "dad what are they doing" I say "they making puppies son" "like that?" "yeah right from behind son. Anyway a few days later kerry walks in on me and the wife having sex and goes "dad what are yous doing?" I say "we making your little brother son" He says "turn the bitch over, id rather have puppies"
Wife who suffers with agraphobia asks husband, why dont you play pokemon go while you out in my company He replies thoughtfully "i love your company so much i dont think about my sexy pikachu"                                                                                                                      little did she know thats his pet name for his mistress he fucks while "playing" pokemon go. Good thing she has a dildo called diglet
A Steel Mill Needed More Workers... My teacher was telling our class how in the Ohio area, the locals, being accustomed to the cold, didn't want to work in a hot steel mill.  The owners of the mill went down to Latin America and offered the Latinos relatively high wages to come work in Ohio.  Since they were already used to the heat and way underpaid, the Mexicans readily agreed.  

I thought they might have wanted the job for another reason.  I explained to the class, "Yeah, they heard the word 'steel' and we're all in."
What's the difference between a pizza and Trevor from GTA The pizza is less greasy
What did you do in Iran? I ran.
How many /r/Jokes users does it take to make a Joke? WRONG! They don't make it, they steal it...
A man goes to visit his grandpa in hospital.. A man goes to visit his grandpa in hospital. "How are you grandpa? he asks.
"Feeling fine," says the old man.
"What's the food like?"
"Terrific, wonderful menus."
"And the nursing?"
"Just couldn't be better. These young nurses really take care of you."
"What about sleeping? Do you sleep OK?"
"No problem at all --- nine hours solid every night. At 10 o'clock they bring me a cup of hot chocolate and a Viagra tablet ... and that's it. I go out like a light."
The grandson is puzzled and a little alarmed by this, so rushes off to question the Sister in charge.
"What are you people doing," he says, "I'm told you're giving a
95-year-old Viagra on a daily basis. Surely, that can't be true?"
"Oh, yes," replies the Sister. "Every night at 10 o'clock we give him a cup of chocolate and a Viagra tablet. It works wonderfully well. The chocolate makes him sleep, and the Viagra stops him from rolling out of bed.":)
I am a perfect role model... …for someone who takes “how much can you fuck up your life?” As an actual challenge.
An American man travels to Japan on business... ...and on his first night he visits a bar in Tokyo to experience the local nightlife. He meets an enchanting woman, and after several rounds of drinks and flirting, she accompanies him back to his hotel. They commence copulation, and in the throws of passion, the woman screams out "Machigatta ana! Machigatta ana!" The man, pleased with himself for appeasing his lover's desires, finishes and rolls over to sleep. 

The next morning, he meets a prospective business associate for golf. On the first hole, his golf partner completes the round under par. In an attempt to impress him, he shouts "Machigatta ana!" His associate replies "What do you mean 'wrong hole'?"
A group of feminists deciede to have a picnic... But nobody made any sandwhiches
A man walks into a bar ... and stays there my entire childhood.
what detergent do retards use? Downy
Why did hitler kill himself? He saw the gas bill. It was over nein thousand.
A world renowned chemist walks into a electronics shop. The chemist wanted a new phone, so the chemist asked one of the employees, "What do you reccomend for me"
The employee put down a Samsung Note 7
The chemist said,"Even I'm not licensed to handle material that explosive"
A Jew, a Czech Republican, and a Canadian go golfing. Out of nowhere, an alligator appears and eats the Czech Republican. 

The Jew and the Canadian chase the alligator into the woods, and when they finally catch up to it, they see that there are two alligators there; a male and a female.

The Canadian takes out his lumber axe and asks the Jew "Which one should I kill?" To which the Jew replies "The male."

So the Canadian kills the male alligator and       looks inside, but finds that there's nothing there.

What's the moral of this story?

Never trust a Jew when they say that there's a Czech in the male.
A kid asks his grandmother "How come ive never seen you and grandpa fight?..." / - ... I see mom and dad fight from time to time, but ive never seen you and grandaddy fight... why is that?

/  - Well, says the grandma, we got married in the old church in the middle of town, after the marriage ceremony, we hopped on our horse carriage, it was a long time ago when horse carriages where still a thing, and cars where just starting to come around... And we went our way to our farm, that was a bit away from town, but half way there, the horse stopped, and it refused to start walking again, so your grandpa got down, stood in front of the horse, looked it directly at his eyes and said "one".

/ - He got up on the carriage again, and the horse started walking, i thought that would be it, but then a few miles ahead, the horse again stopped and refused to keep walking, the horse was not tired, or thirsty or hungry, he was just being stubborn!, so your grandpa got down, stood in front of the horse looked directly at his eyes, and said "TWO", he hopped on and we continued our way, with the horse walking again. 

/ - When we where almost at the farm, the horse decided to stop again, and wouldnt walk, your grandpa, he got down, looked the horse directly in its eyes, and as he said THREE! he pulled out his gun and he shot the horse right between the eyes.

/ - For a second i was just stunned, he calmly started walking towards the carriage and i started yelling at him!, WHATS WRONG WITH YOU?, WHY DID YOU DO THAT FOR?, NOW HOW ARE WE GOING TO GET THE CARRIAGE TO THE FARM?, "WHY DID YOU HAVE TO SHOOT THE HORSE!!!", he looked me directly at my eyes, and said, "one". 


To the person who stole my selfie stick: You need to take a long look at yourself.
How does an Arab nationalist get clean? He has a "Baath"!
To the handicapped guy who stole my bag: You can hide but you can't run.
I asked my mother who was her favorite child... She thought for a second and said, "Do I have to pick one of mine?"
My pet mouse "Elvis" died yesterday... He was caught in a trap.
Tattoo Removal It costs an arm and a leg.
A guy came home from work early and found his girlfriend on the sidewalk with her suitcases. "I'm leaving you" she said.
"Leaving?? Why??"
"I found out that you're a pedophile."
"Pedophile??" he said. "Isn't that an awfully big word for a twelve year old?"

If Hilary and Trump are stranded on a raft in the ocean, who survives? America. America survives.
A guy walks into a bar in West Virginia and orders a white wine. 
All the hillbillies sitting around the bar look up from their beer and whiskey,expecting to see some pitiful Yankee from the north. 
The bartender says, "You ain't from around here, are ya?" 
The guy says, "No, I'm from Canada." 
" Canada " The bartender says, "What do you do in Canada?" 
The guy says, "I'm a taxidermist." 
The bartender says, "A taxidermist? What in the hell is a taxidermist? Do you drive a taxi?" 
"No," says the Canadian "I don't drive a taxi, I mount animals." 
The bartender grins and hollers, 
"It's okay boys. He's one of us."
Why was nobody offended by the Carpenter's language? To be polite, he only used Coarse woods.
They say Jesus never had sex, but he had sex at least twice People are always talking about his second coming.
What's the best thing to do with a thimble? Bang it with a drum-thtick!
Mickey's Piss Mickey was having a great day, enjoying the end of a snow storm when he decided it was time to go and shovel the driveway. 

When he got outside, he noticed something that infuriated him.

Goofy's name was written in piss on his side walk. 

Mickey went from angry to sad when he realized not only was it Goofy's piss, but it was in Minnie's handwriting. 


Why people cry during the weddings? ...they are preparing for whats coming afterwards
What places have the least racial tensions? Bakeries, there are brownies and crackers there and yet they never fight.
How do crazy people make it through a forest? They take the psycho-path.
I bet you are a Taurus... because you are a fat cow.
Why didn't Khaleesi's army go to the movies this weekend? Because they're Unsullied
Hillary and Donald are on a sinking ship. Who gets saved? America
What's the difference between a priest and a zit A zit waits until you're 12 before it comes on your face 
What is an avocado's favorite game to play? Guack-a-mole! 

I'm about to be a dad so this seemed fitting for my first post :)
What do you call a mentally challenged person born in early to mid August? A leotard.
What's the difference between an oral thermometer and a rectal thermometer? The taste
I was at the ATM, and this old lady asked me to help check her balance, So I pushed her over. 
Why did the blonde go to the drive-in theatre in September? She wanted to see "Closed for the Winter"
I was sitting in a bar one day and two really large women came in, talking in an interesting accent. So I said, “Cool accent, are you two ladies from Ireland?” 

One of them snarled at me, “It’s Wales, dumbo!” 

So I corrected myself, “Oh, right, so are you two whales from Ireland?” 

That’s about as far as I remember.﻿
when i was growing up. our tv had a bunch of channels My favorite channel was "Broil"
What's the difference between a burlap sack and my nutsack? The babies in my nutsack are still living. 
Everyone laughed when I told them I was going to become a comedian... But nobody is laughing now. 
What did the canibal do after he dumped his girlfriend? He wiped
People used to laugh at me when I said "I want to be a comedian." Well, nobody's laughing now. 
A man who has been in the police force for 30 years A man who has been in the police force for 30 years decides to retire. He is tired of seeing the worst of society and moves out into the wilderness, 20 miles away from the closest other human life. The only interaction with the world he has is the boy who brings him his paper and groceries twice a month. After living like this for a few years he hears a knock on his door, thinking it strange as the paper boy had come just the other week he opened it with caution to see a large, hairy man standing there. He explained to the ex-cop that he was his neighbor from 20 miles down and wished to invite him to a thanksgiving party. The cop replied "Why not, I haven't seen any other people in quite a while." The other man says to him "Now I gotta warn ya, there'll be some fightin'" the cop nodded and informed him that he had been a cop for 30 years, and it wasn't an issue. "There'll be some eatin'" the cop again tells him it won't be an issue. "There'll be some fuckin'" the cop explains he hasn't felt the touch of a woman in a while, so again no problem. With that the man begins to leave but the cop stops him, and asks him "What should I wear?" The man replies, "What does it matter? It'll just be the two of us!"
Baby horse If a baby horse is really conceited, would you say they're foal of themselves?
What do you call a green pumpkin at halloween? A premature e jack-o-lantern.
What do you call a bear with no teeth?? A gummy bear!!!
How do you get a kid out from a microwave? Please answer before my wife gets home!
I'm trying to keep up with Reddit trends. I guess I'm just a big tool. 
If dog whistles are supposed to call dogs to you... Then wouldn't rape whistles call rapist to you?
have you smelled my new seeded aftershave? The birds love it.
Always say Bismillah before drinking water. There are 3 jinns in your cup.
Two Hydrojinns and one Oxyjinn.
What's Bruce Lee's favorite car? Kiaaaaaaaa
Trump: "If you mess with the United States...." .....there will be hell Toupeeeeee
Why is an aborted baby so hard to fool? Because It wasn't born yesterday.
I once met a samsung prostitute She gave me a blow-job
Why did everyone turn away when the race car drove past? It had a SPOILER on it.
A new soldier, fresh out of boot camp, is deployed to a remote base in Afghanistan. After about a week, the young soldier is approached by his Staff Sergeant.  

"Private, how is everything?" he asks.

"It's ok sir, it's just so desolate out here.  Some of the guys have been deployed here for months... there's no women anywhere... what do they do.... you know, for women?"

The Staff Sergeant motions towards the south end of the base and says "The boys have some camels tied up over there.  No one's gonna judge you out here, son."

The Private shook his head in disgust, telling himself he would never stoop that low.

A few weeks later, the Private is pent up.  He needs release.  He finally decides to join the club, so early one morning he gets up, walks over to the camels, and unties one.

He begins pumping away at the camel from behind, when the Staff Sergeant and the Major discover him. 

"Private, just what in the fuck do you think you're doing?!" the Staff Sergeant asks.

"But, you said.." the Private stammers, still inside the camel.  "You said the boys have these camels tied up!"

"You idiot," the Sergeant says.  "The boys ride the camels into town to hire a prostitute."
What do you call someone who is attracted to Middle Easterns? A Hummusexual. 



I'm tired of pre shredded cheese Make America grate again
Reddit walks into a bar and pulls out its giant tool the bartender says, "ma'am, we dont allow severed penises as payment"
Two blondes walk into a building Bu-dunts.  
What did the American biscuit say to the British biscuit? Girl you sure are sweet.
What's the difference between a man falling from 100ft and a man falling from 10ft ? aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh -  SMACK

SMACK - aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
Two little boys are at the grocery store with their mom... ...and she gives in to their begging and tells them they can each pick one thing in the store to buy.

The older son comes running up to the register with a box of Count-Choco-Boo-Sugar-Bear-Crunch. Typical of course, the mom thinks.

Then the younger son comes running up with a box of tampons. The mother, a bit flustered, blushes and asks "Why do you want to get these?"

Her younger son replies, "Because the commercial on TV says if I have these, I can go camping and swimming and horseback riding and...
This years American president will be... Oh sorry, this years Ameri-cant president will be...
Hillary Clinton is so healthy! She can delete her entire email inbox in an hour.
What do you call a Samsung 7 user taking a selfie? A suicide bomber.
A coworker told me I was a pedophile and said I probably had a van that said "Free Candy" on the side. I told him that would be pointless. My target demographic can't read yet. 
Why is 6 afraid of 7? Because 7 had a faulty battery and caused their house to burn down
North Korea reminds me of a redhead Because they both have no Seoul
A man goes to a restaurant A man walks into a restaurant and sees a sign that read:

Grilled cheese: $4.50
Handjob: $4.00

Intrigued, he motions over his fairly attractive waitress and asks her if she is the one that gives the handjobs. The waitress confirms that she is indeed the one that gives handjob to which the man replies:

Then go wash your hands and fix me up a grilled cheese
Art appreciation The town's gamey wrinkled old slut sauntered into the bar, proud of her new tattoos, portraits of famous figures on the inside of each thigh.  

The bartender couldn't figure out who they were supposed to be. Granny got madder and madder as customer after customer could not name them.  Elroy, the town drunk walked in after the 17th failed guess and prepared to take his turn.  

He squinted. He screwed up his face in concentration. He studied one and then the other. He rubbed his chin. After a good long while everyone could see the light of recognition and he blurted out:

"Can't say who those other fellows are, but the one in the middle is definitely Hillary Clinton!"
What's the difference between a 4chan user and a Cuck? A cuck has a girlfriend.
My penis is like a rocket ship It only takes 10 seconds to blast off
I recently met a Chinese man I recently met a Chinese man and got to know that his name was Kannaswami. 

I asked him, "How did you ever get a name like that being a Chinese?"

He said -"Many, many years ago when I first went to USA, I was standing in line at the Political Asylums Immigration Counter. The man in front of me was a Sri Lankan Tamil refugee. 
The white lady at the counter looked at him and asked 'What is your name?' He replied 'Kannaswami'. 
 
Then she looked at me and asked 'What's your name?' 

I said, 'Sem Ting'."
Why did the blonde tie magnets to her fishing pole? She was fishing for Steelhead Trout
Did you hear about the contest that awarded the winner with a cat? It was a catastrophe.
When asian people go on a merry go round... do they become disoriented?
Where can we study dark matter? Just visit Africa
What insulator has the greatest electrical resistance? your mohm
My cousin is so poor.... that when she couldn't afford pay the Catholic church for her exorcism, they repossessed her.


My Girlfriend blew me last night With Note 7
"Hi there, do you allow smoking on your facilities?" "Sorry, but we run a completely smoke free zoo."

"Alright, thanks. I was just wondering cuz ya'll just smoked my nigga Harambe."
Samsung Is a Girl's name Because it blows
Why did the blonde stare at the orange juice? It said concentrate.
I like to wipe my ass like I drive. Stopping only on red.
How to fall down stairs Step 1

Step 6

Step 8, 9, 11, 12
hi What did the sign in front of Hakurei say? "Abandon hope all ye who enter"
What is the most frequent word in the comment section? This.
Don't ever let a chiropractor tell u a joke. It'll hit your funny bone. 
How do gangsters receive communications? Gmail
A pensioner drove his brand new Mercedes A pensioner drove his brand new Mercedes to 100 mph, looking in his rear view mirror, he saw a police car behind him. He floored it to 140 , then 150, ... then 155, ... Suddenly he thought, "I'm too old for this nonsense !" So he pulled over to the side of the road and waited for the police car to catch up with him. 

The officer walked up to him, looked at his watch and said, "Sir, my shift ends in ten minutes. Today is Friday and I'm taking off for the weekend with my family. If you can give me a good reason that I've never heard before, why you were speeding... I'll let you go." 

The Man looked very seriously at the police man, and replied :- "Years ago, my wife ran off with a policeman, I thought you were bringing her back." !!! 

The Cop left saying, " Have a good day, Sir "..... :)
A gay couple and a lesbian couple are coming over for a weekend getaway at your summer cottage. Who shows up first? The lesbians.  They get there lickity split.  The other couple has to get their shit packed.
How many Vietnam Veterans does it take to screw in a light bulb? YOU DON'T KNOW, MAN, BECAUSE YOU WEREN'T THERE..!!!
Teacher: "Kids, what does the fluffy chicken give you?" Students: Eggs!

Teacher: "Very good! Now what does the pink pig give you?"

Students: "Bacon!"

Teacher: "Great! And what does the fat cow give you?"

Students: "Homework!"
What do you get when you give an ugly woman a dress that makes her beautiful? A woman you still don't want to see naked.
What does all gods have in common? Halo 😇😇😇
Cork man drowns in Lake Garda, Ireland His name was BOB
Why did he have jealousy issues with his Canary Island señorita? Because she was surrounded by playas
My parents told me to put myself in other's shoes. So from the point of view of the blind, I can't see much
Love Vista ,baby why did't the terminator upgrade to window 10 ?
i asked him and he said , "i still love Vista ,baby !"
Life is about perspective. The sinking of the Titanic was a miracle to the lobsters in the ship's kitchen.
Jupiter says to Uranus whats wrong Uranus says I had a shitty day
My wife asked me to stop singing Wonderwall all the time... I said maybe
I bought shoes from a second hand shop. They must've belonged to a junkie though because I've been tripping all day.
If Trump and Hillary are both drowning and you could only save one... What type of sandwich would you make?
When Jimmy Fallon started hosting The Tonight Show, Conan called him up to offer some advice... The first thing he said was:  

"Kill your enemies and see them driven before you..."
I Love Willy In his first day working in an old folks home a young man is bed bathing an old lady. 

He noticed a tattoo and in an attempt to start conversation he comments; 

"I like your tattoo, what is it is says?" 

He strains his eyes to read it (wrinkles and all). 

"I love Willy"? 

"That's right son, I was 19 when I got that done, I am 89 now and 70 years later, nothing has changed, I still love Willy". 

"Who's Willy?" 

"Oh, you know, just anyone's willy".
What do you call a girl on /r/gonewild? A karma whore.
My Football coach got fired because he got accused on Pedophillia charges. But say what you want about the man, he could turn any young tight end into a wide receiver.
I'm glad to be rid of my ex girlfriend. She was a real 'strain on me. At first she restrained me from going out.

Then she restrained me from wearing what I wanted.

Then she restrained sex.

Then there was a restraining order.

Now She's gone and I'm still restrained in these shackles.

I feel caged for life because of my ex.

I hope no one ever finds any body that resembles her.


I'm against sex before marriage.. You might be late for the ceremony.
What's brown and sounds like a bell? DUNNNNNNGGGggggg
If I steal jokes from The Far Side... ...Do you think the will charge me with Larsony?
Porn addiction is a serious thing I have first hand experience.
My doctor says that ibuprofen is a better alternative to alcohol in dealing with the pain life deals you. Which explains the rampant ibuprofen problems in our schools. 
I want to play my video games like i do my relationships with women... I just want to pay up front.
What do you get when you cross-breed a shark and a cow? I have no idea but I wouldn't milk it.
What kind of money do religious businesses make? Prophet.
Why are pills white? Because they work
What do you call a lesbian dinosaur? A lickalotapus
I didn't let my st-st-stutter stop me from achieving my dream career I'm a door-to-door salesman. I sell "No Soliciting" signs. The more I st-st-stutter the more I seem to sell.
What's Mordor's official website? mordor.ork
"Lucy, in the sky, with diamonds" John Lennon - World's Worst Cluedo Player.
A policeman shoots a black guy and says "Hmm, again" But the image was still blurry
I recently became a father Is a weird way to say I just got a girlfriend and she started calling me "Daddy."
This hating of people that breastfeed in public really has to stop. I can raise my cat any way I want.
What's a ghost's favorite tourist attraction? The BOO-seum.

(Edit: I'll see myself out.)
A gay couple and a lesbian couple Both need to leave quickly.
Who gets out first?
The gay couple. Their shit's already packed.
How many /r/ users does it take to change a lightbulb? Three. One to do it, one to complain that it has already been done before, and one to repost this joke.
Why did the 1 armed man cross the road? To get to the second hand store. 



Sisters of Mercy Brothel A man is in middle of long, boring drive when he sees a sign on the side of the road that says "Sisters of Mercy Brothel, 50 miles".
He's a little taken aback and thinks he read it wrong, and he keeps driving.
Am little while later he sees another sign, "Sister of Mercy Brothel, 10 miles".
He can't believe what he's seeing and continues his drive.
Soon he sees the sign with an arrow "Sisters of Mercy Brothel".
His curiosity gets the best of him and he pulls over into the parking lot.
On the door there's a sign "Enter, my child", so he goes inside and follows a long, winding, dark pathway until he reaches another door with a basket in front of it. 
Above the basket it says "Drop $100 in the basket and enter".
Now excited, the man drops his $100 and opens the door.
The door slams shut behind him and he finds himself back in the parking lot next to a sign...
"You've just been screwed by the Sisters of Mercy. Go in Peace".
What's Adolf Hitler's favourite computer game? Mein Kraft.
My friend's son really has trouble reading and writing. I told him he's probably quite unliterate.
There's a fat man in a schoolyard. A mother approaches him and asks:

"Are you waiting for a child?"

So he replies:

"No, I'm just fat"
What do you call a vegetarian with diarrhea? A salad shooter.
Farting in a lift. It's wrong on so many levels.
What do you call a place where a black person sleeps? A cocoon! 
How often to wizard journalists get paid? They make a Daily Prophet.
There’s warnings of a new disease found in soft butter. Apparently it spreads very easily!
Dining Out A waiter approached our table and asked us if we enjoyed our meal.

“It was absolutely delicious, I ate every last bit!” said my wife.

“And Sir?” said the waiter. “How did you find the pork belly?”

“Oh, about six years ago, we met at a sales convention.”
If two vegans are arguing Is it still called beef? 
My dog used to chase people on a bike a lot. It got so bad, finally I had to take his bike away.
Can a kangaroo jump higher than a house? Of course! A house can't jump after all.
What do you call a lesbian dinosaur? A lick-a-lotta-puss  :)
Did you know light travels faster than sound? That's why some people appear bright (until you hear them talk).
I'm so upset that all the dad jokes on this sub are reposts or just plain shit, there's no originality. "Hi, so upset that all the dad jokes on this sub are reposts or just plain shit, there's no originality, I'm dad."
The other morning my Mom came downstairs wearing nothing but a very suggestive nightgown. When I asked, she said it was a Freudian slip.
How do you communicate with a fish? Drop him a line.
Mama's Bible Four brothers left home for college, and they became successful doctors
and lawyers.

One evening, they chatted after having dinner together. 

They discussed the 95th birthday gifts they were able to give their elderly
mother who moved to Florida .

The first said, "You know I had a big house built for Mama."

The second said, "And I had a large theater built in the house."

The third said, "And I had my Mercedes dealer deliver an SL600 to her."

The fourth said, "You know how Mama loved reading the Bible and you know
she can't read anymore because she can't see very well.  I met this 
preacher who told me about a parrot who could recite the entire Bible. It took
ten preachers almost 8 years to teach him. I had to pledge to contribute
$50,000 a year for five years to the church, but it was worth it. 
Mama only has to name the chapter and verse, and the parrot will recite it."

The other brothers were impressed. After the celebration Mama sent out
her "Thank You" notes.

She wrote: Milton , the house you built is so huge that I live in only one
room, but I have to clean the whole house. Thanks anyway." 
 
"Michael, you gave me an expensive theater with Dolby sound and it can
hold 50 people, but all of my friends are dead, I've lost my hearing, 
and I'm nearly blind. I'll never use it. Thank you for the gesture just the 
same." 

"Marvin, I am too old to travel. I stay home; I have my groceries
delivered, so I never use the Mercedes. The thought was good. Thanks."

"Dearest Melvin, you were the only son to have the good sense to give 
a little thought to your gift. That chicken was delicious. Thank you so much."

Love, Mama
Someone was taken down to the police station after they were caught drinking vodka from a coffee cup while driving. They took a mug shot.
A man was driving along a country road when he saw a sign that read "Peaches, All Flavors, 1 Mile." A man was driving along a country road when he saw a sign that read "Peaches, All Flavors, 1 Mile." After seeing this he thought to himself, "I gotta see this!" After driving for a mile he saw the stand and pulled off to investigate.

"Hi, I saw your sign and want to know how you can have peaches all flavors?"

"Well, sir, pick a flavor."

"OK, strawberry."

With that the man went to a barrel and pulled out a peach and gave it to the customer. The customer bit into it and it tasted like strawberries.

"That's amazing! It really tastes like strawberries. Can you do blueberry?"

With that the man went to a barrel and pulled out a peach and gave it to the customer. The customer bit into it and it tasted like blueberries.

"Here's a good one. Peanut butter and jelly."

The man went to a barrel and pulled out a peach and gave it to the customer. The customer bit into the peach and it tasted like peanut butter.

"Hey, I taste the peanut butter but where's the jelly?"

"Turn it around," replied the man.

The customer turned the peach around and bit into it and tasted jelly."

"OK, here's a hard one: pussy."

With that the man went to a barrel and pulled out a peach and gave it to the customer the customer bit into it and responded, "This tastes like shit!"

"Turn it around," replied the man.
Why can't a Samsung be disguised as an iPhone? Because eventually, its cover would be blown.
When I see lovers' names carved in a tree, I don't think it's sweet. I just think it's surprising how many people bring a knife on a date.
An Asian Woman Walks into a bank She asks the teller "I want to change my yuan to darruh." The teller replies" I'll give you 1 dollar for 30 yuan." She says" What da hell!?!? yesterday I give you 20 yuan for 1 dollar." He shrugs "Fluctuations." She angrily yells back "Well fluck you white people too!!!"
How many feminists does it take to change a lightbulb? One, except she doesn't change the lightbulb, she tells her husband to do it.
The iPhone 7 is waterproof. It is also headphones-proof.
How to piss off the whole r/Jokes community? Stolen from other subreddit.
What's the square root of 69? Eight something.....
An owl was getting really worried and went to his friend's nest. (you should now owl biology to get this) An owl was getting really worried and went to his friend's nest. 

His friend said, "hello there, how are you?"

The owl simply replies, "look i need an owl-eye because i can't seem to catch anything to eat at all." 

Edit one: changed the wording
A man comes home one night with a duck under his arm. He walks up to his wife and says "Look at the pig I've been fucking."

She replies "That's a duck you moron!"

The man says "I wasn't talking to you."
Why is the all-lisp percussion section so quiet? Because thimbles aren't very loud.
I'm living in a rough neighbourhood... Some thug tore the front and back pages of my dictionary out!
It just goes from Bad to Worse
Why are ophans no good at baseball? They dont know where home is. 
a guy's wife died so in her memory, every month, he takes half of his paycheck and throws in in the trash
Sometimes i have a feminist in me... ...but then I go to the toilet, flush it and its gone
The only thing I smell is molasses." There was a papa mole, a momma mole, and a baby mole. They lived in a hole out in the country near a farmhouse. Papa mole poked his head out of the hole and said, "Mmmm, I smell sausage!" Momma mole poked her head outside the hole and said, "Mmmm, I smell pancakes!" Baby mole tried to stick his head outside but couldn't because of the two bigger moles. Baby mole said, "The only thing I smell is molasses." 
I love artwork by Native Americans. They are so cree-ative!
Your face Is wonderful

Bet you were offended by the title *topkek*
What happens when the knee increases? NiGrows
Why did the Libertarian cross the road? "None of your damn business. Am I being detained?"
I spent some quality time with my 5-year old grandson today watching a movie.... Halfway through he asked, "Is that lady going to die?" 

"Probably," I replied, "judging by the size of that horse's cock."
Me? Racist? No way! Racism is a crime, and crime is for black people.
I used to think my brain was the most important part of my body Then I thought, look who's telling me that. 
Edit: LAUGH AT THE JOKE
What do you call the Ku Klux Klan on welfare? Black Lives Matter
The secretary keeps hearing music coming from the printer... I think the paper is jamming.
You are beautiful. Thanks. Just joking. 
I could see my girlfriend was furious when I blew my load last night... I could see it in her eyes.
A women is out golfing and finds a frog trapped in the woods... A Woman was out golfing one day when she hit the ball into the woods.  
  
She went into the woods to look for it and found a frog in a trap.  
  
The frog said to her, "If you release me from this trap, I will grant you three wishes."  
  
The woman freed the frog, and the frog said, "Thank you, but I failed to mention that there was a condition to your wishes.  
  
Whatever you wish for, your husband will get times ten!"  
  
The woman said, "That's okay."  
  
For her first wish, she wanted to be the most beautiful woman in the world.  
  
The frog warned ☝her, "You do realize that this wish will also make your husband the most handsome man in the world, an Adonis whom women will flock to".  
  
The woman replied, "That's okay, because I will be the most beautiful woman and he will have eyes only for me."  
  
So, KAZAM-she's the most beautiful woman in the world!  
  
For her second wish, she wanted to be the richest woman in the world.  
  
The frog said, "That will make your husband the richest man in the world. And he will be ten times richer than you."  
  
The woman said, "That's okay, because what's mine is his and what's his is mine."  
  
So, KAZAM-she's the richest woman in the world!  
  
The frog then inquired about her third wish, and she answered, "I'd like a mild heart attack."  
  
Moral of the story: Women are clever. Don't mess with them.  
  
Attention female readers : This is the end of the joke for you. Stop here and continue feeling good.  
  
Male readers: Please scroll down.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
The man had a heart attack ten times milder than his wife.  
  
Moral of the story: Women think they're really smart.  
  
Let them continue to think that way and just enjoy the show.  
  
Note: If you are a woman and are still reading this; it only goes to show that women never listen.
If cats hate water Why are pussies always wet?
After millions of years of human development and ingenius inventions we still can't answer one simple question... Do you know the muffin man? 
What do you call a gorilla that is on fire ? Flarambe
Whats the difference between Harry Potter and a Jew Harry made it out of the chamber
His palms are sweaty, knees weak, arms are heavy. There's vomit on his sweater already... Woman: Did you just quote Eminem? 

Doctor: Your husband's alcohol poisoning is not a joke, madam!
I found a large collection of /r/jokes and I copied the best ones. The first 10 are great but the last one is fucking gold... 01) great

02) great

03) great

04) great

05) great

06) great

07) great

08) great

09) great

10) great

11) fucking gold
Did you know... 3/2 of the world's population sucks at fractions?
Why can't frenchmen count to four? Because there is a tree in the way.
How many dead hookers does it take to change a light bulb? At least not 3 because my basement is still dark...
How do you tell when a lawyer is lying? Their lips are moving
Two friends are out hunting One friend looks through his scope and into a house and says

"Hey I can see your wife and she is cheating on you with your neighbor"

The other friend says 
"I've had enough of her cheating on me, this is the last straw! I want you to shoot him in the crotch and her in the head!"

His friend adjusts his scope and says 
"I can get that in one shot."

I will work for Apple But I take bananas too. Or just any food. Please.
Police Officer 
Police officer: "Can you identify yourself, sir?"
 
Driver pulls out his mirror and says: "Yes, it's me."

Two crabs walk into a bar The first crab says, "Who's getting the first round?"

The second crab says, "You get the first one, and then get all subsequent rounds as well!"
At the teraphist: "Sometimes i just can't focus at work!" Patient: "that's fine, but we are here to talk about my problems."
Boss Like Diaper A Boss is like a diaper, always on your ass and usually full of shit
I am trying to find my selfie image in iPhone 7 Until I remember I took that one with John Cena.
If I had $1 Million dollars, I'd sleep with your mom. I don't know what I'd do with the other $999,990 though.
What's a paedophile's favourite musical scale? A minor
Who are the fastest readers? 9/11 victims- 100 storeys in 10 seconds
What's grey and comes in pints? An Elephant.
Why did Tim Cook fire an unpaid intern lately? His name was Jack

What does Miley Cyrus eat on Thanksgiving? Twerkey!
What do the Japanese do during erections? They vote. 
BREAKING NEWS: They just found Hillary's emails. 30 thousand 'penis enlargement' offers.
What triggers feminists? Genders
iPhone 7 hidden message to all buyers "Jack off"
A man collapses in a busy street. Someome from the crowd shouts "Somebody call him an ambulance!"

Suddenly, another voice calls out "You're an ambulance!"
How much does it cost to kill Tony Stark's parents? Just one buck. 
What is the difference between Trump and Hillary? She can't make America great again.
What do you call Nicky Minaj's ass? Silicone valley
If there's one thing that really keeps me down to earth, It's gravity
What do you call 2 horses side by side in a stable? Neigh-bours.
I have a good headphone, the sound quality was so great Until I bought iPhone 7
Germany, in the year 1938 A man walks into the local branch of the Ministry of the Interior and tells the secretary he wants to change his name.

"What's your current name?" asks the secretary.

"Adolf Cohen" answers the man.

"What - you really think changing your surname will make us believe that you're Aryan?" 

"No - I want to change my first name."
What's the best thing about banging 28 year olds? There's 20 of them.




don't get triggered, just a joke! Paedophilia is not funny
What's the difference between a drummer and a toilet? The toilet only has to take shit from one asshole at a time. . .
country drive One day, a man was driving down the road in the country. 
He looks over and sees a cute little pig in the field. He pulls over and picks up the pig. 
He is driving around town and a cop sees him and pulls him over. 
Cop says, "What are you doing with that pig in the car?"
Driver says, "Well I just founs the pig down the road in the field."
Cop says, "I want you to take that pig to the zoo.!"
Driver says, "Well alright"
Cop says, "I mean it, you take that pig to the zoo"
So the next day, guy is driving around town and he still has the pig in the car and the cop sees him and pulls him over again and says, "Hey, what are you doing! I thought I told you to take that pig to the zoo!"
Driver says, "Well I did take rhe pig to the zoo! We had such a good time, we are going to the ball game now!"
I just had a huge fight with my dog She's such a bitch. 
What did the German Madame do at the start of Oktoberfest? Lead her hoes in
A pirate walks into a bar with a steering wheel on his crotch, and he sits down at the bar.

The bartender says "Sir, did you know you have a steering wheel on your crotch?"

The Pirate says "Yeah I know, it's drivin' me nuts"
I found the rulebook for an old card game at my grandfather's house. "Draw a card, if it's black, take a shot."

Oh wait, that's just the LAPD guidebook.
Chelsea FC captain had a night to forget, his performance was Terryble
A world without women...... Is a pain in the ass
What's the difference between hard and light? I can go to sleep with a light on.
A man brought his son to a grocery store... A man brought his son to a grocery store, but as soon as they walked in the store the young child began to throw a temper tantrum. While they went down each aisle the child would yell, throw items in and out of the cart, and overall just be an annoyance.
Despite the scene his son was causing, the father was cool and collected, slowly and calmly saying, "Don't worry, Donald. It'll be alright, Donald, we'll be home soon."
A nearby mother was very impressed with the father's self control, and wanted to express her gratitude for such calm parenting. "Sir, I'm amazed that you are able to be so calm! It's not every day I see such patient and gracious parenting. Now little guy, what seems to be the problem, Donald?"
"Oh no, ma'am, you're mistaken!" The father interjected, "This is my son, Henry. I'm Donald!"
I think my neighbor is stalking me through her computer, because I've seen her google my name. I'm certain I saw it on my telescope last night.
Whats a bros favorite mexican food. Carne asuhdude

hey girl, are you into adopting animals? Because I will probably pee in your bed and run away
Confucius Say . . . Man who run in front of car get tired. 

Man who run behind car get exhausted. 

Stabbing a man with a spoon is pointless.
Why can you RAN in a campsite, but never RUN in a campsite? Because it's always past-tents. 
What's something a coat hanger steals? Babies 
Dummy husband A man asked his wife, "if you could have anything in the world for one day, what would you want?" 

 "I'd love to be six again," she replied. 

 On the morning of her birthday, he got her up bright and early and off they went to a local theme park. What a day! He put her on every ride in the park: the Death Slide, the Screaming Loop, the Wall of Fear, everything there was! Wow! Five hours later she staggered out of the theme park, her head reeling and her stomach upside down. Off to a McDonald's they went, where her husband ordered her a Big Mac along with extra fries and a refreshing chocolate shake. Then it was off to a movie: the latestHollywood blockbuster, hot dogs, popcorn, Pepsi Cola and M & M's. What a fabulous adventure! 

 Finally she wobbled home with her husband and collapsed into bed. He leaned over and lovingly asked, "Well, dear, what was it like being six again?"  One eye opened. "You dummy, I meant my dress size." 
[Original] What is the similarity between bi-people and a pendulum? They swing both ways.
I hate Russian dolls. They're so full of themselves.
On Family Guy, why is the Griffen's internet so slow? They only have one meg.
Two guys are walking down the street and see a dog licking his balls... One of them says, "man, I wish I could do that!"


The other says, "well, maybe you should pet him first."
Where did this concept of kidnappers using white vans come from? I mean, I just use my Prius, stop being so stereotypical, jeez.
Made you read this Gotcha 
LPT: If your girl ever asks you which of her friends you want to have a three-way with, DO NOT GIVE HER TWO NAMES!
What's the difference between a decrepit rickety bus and the Egyptian god of death? One is an old bus and the other is Anubis. 
What do you call Nicki Minaj's buttcrack? Silicone Valley
I understand feminism My wife gets to decide what she cooks for me!
Two paedophiles are waiting at a bus stop when an 8 year old girl walks past... One says to the other, "I bet she was a looker in her day."
Two muffins are in a tin in the oven. One says to the other, "man it's hot in here."
The other says, "HOLY SHIT A TALKING MUFFIN!"
I've had it and I can't take it anymore ...ever since I developed that penicillin allergy.
I greeted the Buddhist hooker I hired at the door.. I laid out the terms: as soon as we were finished she needed to leave. I guess she was lonely, she replied "nah-I'm-a-stay."
Think about a world without hyperboles That would be the worst!
Why did Hitler make such a bad weatherman? Even when it was rain, he kept yelling "heil!"
Two friends and bears Two campers are walking through the woods when a huge brown bear suddenly appears in the clearing about 50 feet in front of them. The bear sees the campers and begins to head toward them. The first guy drops his backpack, digs out a pair of sneakers, and frantically begins to put them on. The second guy says, "What are you doing? Sneakers won’t help you outrun that bear." "I don’t need to outrun the bear," the first guy says. "I just need to outrun you."
What do you call a brain surgeon that had a C- average? A dentist
Why American Names Are Like – “Jackson, Wilson, Markson..... Robinson, Kenson, Anderson, Davidson, Jemson, Johnson”

Because This Is The Easy Way For Mom To Remember Who Is Whose Son.
A man's baby was born while he was at work... As soon as he gets out, he rushes to the hospital to see his son.

On the first floor, he sees a sign which says "here's where gorgeous babies are". He asks the doctor "Is my baby, Gerald, here?" and the doctor says "no, try next floor".

On the second floor, he sees a sign which says "here's where average babies are". He asks the doctor "Is my baby, Gerald, here?" and the doctor says "no, try next floor".

On the third floor, he sees a sign which says "here's where ugly babies are". He asks the doctor "Is my baby, Gerald, here?" and the doctor says "no, try next floor".

On the fourth floor, he sees a sign which says "here's where hideous babies are". He asks the doctor "Is my baby, Gerald, here?" and the doctor says "no, try next floor".

The man, pissed off, goes to the fifth floor. There, he sees a sign which says "here's where Gerald is".
What do Reddit Users and Olive Oil have in common? They're both extra virgin.
I was wrong about Hillary not having sufficient doctoring. Turns out she's surrounded by spin doctors.
A mom has three kids: snowflake, sandy and brickie... Snowflake comes to her and says "mommy, why am I called snowflake?", the mom says "because when you were born a little snowflake fell on your head..." 

Then Sandy comes around and asks "mommy mommy, why is my name Sandy?" 

"because when you were born, there was a sandstorm and you got a little bit of sand in your face"





Then brickie appears out of nowhere and says "momomommy whhsy imruaj bricksusiejen?"
Why didn't George like driving through tunnels with people in his car? He didn't want to get carpool tunnel syndrome.  
Why is Mortal Kombat X popular among SJWs? Because it has the Block Button.

*cue the flames*
What do you call a former member of ISIS? What do you call a former member of ISIS?






WASWAS
A man with his wife and two young children was checking into a hotel.. As he was discussing the room, the man asked the employee if the porn was disabled. The employee replied "No, its just regular you sick fuck."
I sexually identify as a giant.. ..my pronouns are Fee, Fi, Fo, and Fum
It's better to have loved a short man than to never have loved a tall.
A little known fact about Uranus... ...it's a gas giant.
People from the food stamp office came by today to inspect our store I hope they didn't make any SNAP judgments
What's big but small? A midget's ego.
I'm not fucking stupid. I mean, I was, but we broke up.
Ever notice how there's not many jokes about steaks? It's a rare medium well done.
How does a coat steal something? They jacket
A pedophile is caught raping a child. He goes to jail. The newspaper article the next days has this headline.


**13 Year-old Boy Caught Raping 29 Year-old Woman**



[Long] [Religion] In a kingdom of the past, a long way away... ... there was a village that lived on the edges of the kingdom, by a mountainside. The village was intially called "Trifville", as a play on how worthless it was to haggle in the village market - over time, people began affectionately calling the village "Triddville", and the villagers, "Tridds".

The town itself was very religious; there were four sectors of the village - the Christian sector, which followed the teachings of the town priest; the Islamic sector, which followed the teachings of the town imam; and the Jewish sector, which followed the teachings of the town rabbi. The former two were born in the village, and the lattermost was initially a traveler from another village who chose to stay.

One day, a giant appeared at the top of the mountain by the town, bellowing and shaking the ground with each breath. Naturally, the people panicked - until each of the religious figures claimed that the monster was a punishment from the heavens for having a poor market. The villagers were then torn amongst themselves; there was much rioting and pillaging between the three sectors, until a small boy, furious with the riots, screamed at the top of his lungs, "IF THOSE BASTARDS ALL THINK THEY KNOW WHAT THE TROUBLE IS, LET THEM FIX IT!"

There was silence.

There was more silence.

There was prolonged silence.

A slow chant rose from the villagers, "GIANT - THEY SLAY". It got faster. It got more energetic.

It got wild.

Eventually, the villagers raided the homes of the priest, imam, and rabbi (which were previously untouched), and threatened them to stoning if they had not solved the giant problem.

While they had been reluctant at first, when the villagers had kidnapped all of their daughters as hostages, the priest, imam, and rabbi seemed overly enthusiastic to solve the problem immediately.  

First, the priest made the trek up the large mountain. Being the middle-aged man he was, he took a week to climb the sizable spike. When he encountered the giant, he said, "Brother Giant, can you not spare the villagers of your incessant breathing and stomping. My young girl wakes up every night, scared, because of your actions."

The giant, without a word, kicks the priest in the testicles so hard that the priest loses his balance, and falls backward down the mountain. He is dead before he touches the base of the mountain.

Second, the imam made the hike up the large mountain. Being the somewhat seniorly man he was, he took a two weeks to climb the colossal mound. When he encountered the giant, he said, in Arabic, "Brother Giant, shall you spare the villagers of your ever frequent breathing and stomping. My dearest children wake up every night, scared, because of your actions."

The giant, with a puzzled look, kicks the imam in the balls so hard that the imam loses his balance, and somersaults backward down the mountain. He is dead before he can scream.

Lastly, the rabbi made the journey to the top of Mount Giant. At the base of the mountain, he saw the rotting bodies of the priest and the imam; their abdomens were noticably caved in. The rabbi, slightly unnerved, just muttered to himself, *"...just a test... it's just a test..."* Being the elderly man he was, he took a three weeks to climb the colossal mound. When he encountered the giant, he said, "Brother Giant, could you please leave us?"

Suprisingly enough, the Giant said, "Okee dokee," and, from then on, the village was not disturbed from the Giant any longer. The rabbi, overwhelmed by his sucess, blurted out, "My brothers - the priest and the imam, I've seen them at the base of this mountain, with their abdomens caved inwards. Why haven't I recieved the same fate?"

The Giant, smiles and says, "Silly rabbi! Kicks are for Tridds!"

-------------------------------------------------------------------

*Note: I'm supportive of all religions. This is just a really long joke with a ton of unnessisary filler.*

A man's wife gave birth while he was on a business trip. The doctor called and asked, "Did you know you were having quintuplets?"
 "I'm not surprised," the man replied, "I've got a dick like a stovepipe!"
 "You should probably get it cleaned then," said the doctor, "because they're all black."
We're having a lawnmower sale down at Lowes Buy one get Juan free!
My wife’s jealousy is getting ridiculous... The other day she looked at my calendar and wanted to know who May was.
Did you hear that Hillary dropped out of the presidential race? They did a colonoscopy and found out she had a brain tumor.
What shark has the most privilege? A great white!
What's the worst part about shaking a one-armed man? You know that's his masturbating hand
A man walks into a bar and sees 3 pieces of meat hanging from the ceiling The guy asks, "What's this about?" The bartender replies, "Well, if you can jump up and slap the meat, you get free drinks for the rest of the night. If you miss, you pay for everyone's drink for the next hour. You wanna do it?" The guy replies, "Nah the steaks are too high".
I'm in a complex relationship My girlfriend is imaginary.
I took a picture of the fog with my new iPhone 7.... iMist 
Why are Asians such bad drivers? Because fried rice can make you drowsy.
I don’t think I was concentrating properly when midnight struck on January 1st 2000. It just went in one era and out the other.
Why did the man bring his bed with him to the hospital? It's because he heard hospital beds have a high mortality rate.
What is nine inches long and keeps a woman up screaming all night? Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
What is Reddit's favorite airliner? Virgin airlines.
Did you hear about the italian chef? He pasta way
How do you gently wake up a sleeping baby? Don't preheat the oven when you bake it.
What do you call the composer's tortoise? Bach's turtle
Why did the janitor get fired from the bank? Because he cleaned out the vault. 
Why don't aliens eat clowns? Because they taste funny.
So I was hiding in a closet the other day... I was dressed up in a Batman suit and was waiting for my girlfriend to get home. I saw her walk in and jumped out of the closet and tackled her to the bed. 

"A Batman suit? Isn't that a bit ostentatious?" She asked as she rolled her eyes.

"Ostentatious?' I replied, "Isn't that a big word for an eight year old?"




How many extroverts does it take to change a lightbulb? Let's throw a party while we're at it. 
How are Prisoners and Native Americans alike? News dont care about either of them 
Samsung users are like... "Im glad Samsung is finally blowing up."
You know Reddit, yall like school in the summertime... No class.
What did Mike Tyson say to the Death Star elevator attendant? "Sith floor pleaths"
What pokemon does South America have that other continents don't? Zikachu.
What do you call a place where they don't allow sleeveless shirts? A gun free zone
Roses are red.. I'm in debt.
What's the difference between a hungry girl and a horny girl? Where she puts the cucumber. 
Where does Stevie Wonder park his car? In blind spots. 
Airman Jones was assigned to the induction center... ... where he advised new recruits about their government benefits, especially their GI insurance.

It wasn't long before Captain Smith noticed that Airman Jones had almost a 100% record for insurance sales, which had never happened before.

Rather than ask about this, the Captain stood in the back of the room and listened to Jones's sales pitch.

Jones explained the basics of the GI Insurance to the new recruits, and then said: "If you have GI Insurance and go into battle and are killed, the government has to pay $200,000 to your beneficiaries.

If you don't have GI insurance, and you go into battle and get killed, the government only has to pay a maximum of $6000." "Now," he concluded, "which bunch do you think they are going to send into battle first?"
The US government is taking Samsung to court. They're being charged with a fault in battery. 
Why was the 'P' irate? Because his peg leg made him go 'R' 
Why does Captain America love fats? They're all HYDRAphobic
How do you keep a running back from dropping the football? Paint it like a watermelon. 
How many feminists does it take to change a light bulb? Two. One to change the bulb, and the other to suck my dick.
What goes well with a mans jean jacket? A suicide note.
How many lightbulb changing jokes are on /r/jokes? Way too fucking many
If you "pumpkin spice laté" in the mirror three times a white girl in yoga pants will appear and tell you all her favorite things about fall.
How many introverts does it take to screw in a light bulb? Why does it have to be a group activity?
My friend texted saying she was threatened by an organization. "And their name was"

"ISIS"

"Calm down! Is who?"
What did one lesbian vampire said to another lesbian vampite? Same time next month.
---------

What did one ball said to the other ball? 
Don't trust the guy in between us, he's a dick, and the guy behind is an asshole.
-----------

Why was 6 jealous?
Because 7 8 9
-------------

What did 6 say to 9? If there is ever a period in between us, I think we should 99
How do you know that Adam and Eve were white? Have you ever tried taking a rib from a black man?
Did you know that I hold the World's Record for the smallest penis? It's really hard to beat...
Sometimes you have to choose between what is hard and what is easy Luckily for you I'm both right now
What did drunk say to the blonde? Nice ass.
I have huge gentiles. My Yids are fairly average though.
"Dad, tell me a joke" "Pussy"

"I don't get it"

"I know, son"
Why is the Flying Spaghetti Monster made out of pasta? Made out of bread was taken.
The Cheerio Joke On a planet called Cheeriolia, the population is divided into three societal classes: Cheerios are the lower class, Applejacks are in the middle, and Fruit Loops are the wealthy elite. One cannot intermarry between classes, unfortunately, and discrimination is rampant between them. An authoritarian government keeps very close tabs on individual classes and poverty lines criss-cross through big cities. Cheerios are doomed to a certain limit of wealth, Applejacks cannot earn more than Fruit Loops, and Fruit Loops must pay even heavier taxes. Life is difficult, and each class has its own unique complaints with the way they are forced to live.

A Cheerio named Joe worked at a local Wal-Mart as a cashier, a position he had held for years because his boss is a penny-pinching Applejack. One day, he was bagging groceries for a fellow Cheerio when a Fruit Loop walked through the door, frantically darting her eyes around, panting. She ran down a couple isles, found what she was looking for, and hurried to the check-out area. The Fruit Loop had jumped into the same express lane that Joe was manning. Even though the line was moving quickly, it was an especially busy day and there were quite a few people in the queue. She exclaimed,

“Won’t this line move any faster?”

The Cheerio in front of her shook his head and chuckled to himself. The Fruit Loop didn’t notice. She stood with her one item tucked under her arm, glaring at the rest of the line. Five minutes later, she was at the line’s head. Joe looked at her, in awe of her beauty. She was, perhaps, the most beautiful Fruit Loop he had ever seen. His mouth fell open as she said,

“I don’t usually shop here…”

Her pejorative comment had no effect on Joe, who still could not believe his eyes. The Fruit Loop had to snap her fingers in Joe’s face for him to finally take her credit card. She paid and left, but Joe could not stop thinking about her. He resolved to find out who she was and make her fall in love with him. There was only one problem: he was a Cheerio, and she was a Fruit Loop—even if she *did* love him, it was against the law for them to marry. Still, the thought of love and marriage was hopeful, and it occupied his mind for the next two years.

During those next two years, Joe never stopped thinking about the beautiful Fruit Loop. He worked as hard as he could, bought a chin-up bar to hand in the doorway of his tiny apartment, and subscribed to a gym membership. Joe lost some weight, started running in the mornings, and let his beard grow out. One day, much to his surprise, he awoke to a brand-new, hot-pink body that smelled very sweetly of apples. He had made the jump from Cheerio to Applejack! 

That morning, Joe walked through the doors of the Wal-Mart and his co-workers stared at him, with their mouths agape. He continued working as a cashier, but one day the CEO of Wal-Mart fired Joe’s boss and promoted him to manager at the request of his co-workers, who knew his humble nature and diligence would help their local Wal-Mart. He doubled their pay, and even helped stock shelves when he had nothing else to do. 

A few months passed, and Joe still worked out after the workday ended, but he became very lonely. The beautiful Fruit Loop still was all he thought about, so he devoted even more of his time to work and committed himself to physical fitness. In his deluded aspirations, he sought to win the heart of the Fruit Loop without even knowing her name. 

Just as his hope was running low, the same Fruit Loop entered the Wal-Mart, again looking very rushed, and ran down the aisle frantically looking for another item. As she was running around a corner, she ran into Joe, who was carrying a stack of boxes. They collapsed onto the floor. The Fruit Loop began to shout obscenities as Joe helped her up.

“Sorry, miss.”

She sighed.

“No, I’m sorry. I ran into you. I should have been watching.”

“I’m Joe.”

His voice quivered slightly, and he held out his hand.

“Vanessa.”

Joe led Vanessa to the cashiers, where he let his Cheerio employee go on break so he could check Vanessa out. He took a good look at her, and it was as if not a day had passed since he had seen her last. The only difference now was that he was a jacked-up Applejack who felt much closer to winning Vanessa’s heart. She took her item and left once again. Thoughts of marrying Vanessa didn’t leave his mind for three more years.

In those three years, Joe committed every waking moment to physical fitness. He was promoted at work and given authority over all the Wal-Marts in the tri-state area. Joe was still kind to his employees and gave them high salaries, but the economy was booming and he earned quite a bit of money without working very long hours. He attended some formal parties for Wal-Mart executive Fruit Loops and saw they way they lived, so luxuriously. Joe envied it. But all his wishes and hopes relied on his body and what he was made of. He did not lose hope. And one day, much to Joe’s glee, he awoke to a brand-new, sugar-coated, bright blue body. He was finally a Fruit Loop!

That morning, Joe walked from his penthouse flat to the office and, like he usually did, ran up the stairs. All the cubicles were full when he entered, and everyone peered over to get a look at his new body. All the Applejacks in accounting were amazed, all the Applejacks in IT were amazed, and all the Applejacks in administration were amazed. His boss, the Fruit Loop directly under the CEO, took notice quickly and put in a good word with the CFO, who put in an even better word with the CEO. Both thought very highly of Joe and both thought he would make the perfect CEO one day. No-one knew that the CFO was sleeping with the CEO’s wife, however, and when the CEO found out, he delved so deep into alcohol that the board of trustees voted to let him go and replace him with Joe. 

One day, Joe was walking down the street to the office when he passed Vanessa. She had not aged one day in the last three years, and he immediately stopped to reintroduce himself. Vanessa was surprised it was Joe, because she remembered him to be a mere Applejack, but she did remember him nonetheless. He asked her out for some drinks later that night, and she agreed.

Later that night, they met at a bar and got to talking. Joe discovered that Vanessa, despite her goddess-like beauty, had never been married and had only dated a couple other Fruit Loops. He was just as surprised when Vanessa said that she was interested in dating himself. Joe replied with a definite “yes” without hesitation. His dream had come true; now he was to only win her heart. When Joe got home that night, he put himself through the most strenuous workout he had ever done and fell asleep immediately after he had done his last deadlift. 

Vanessa and Joe dated for eight months. Then, one day, on the terrace of his penthouse overlooking the harbor, Joe asked her to marry him. Vanessa screamed “yes!”

Over the next eight years, Joe and Vanessa were faithful to each other. They had three healthy, beautiful children, and Joe continued working as the CEO of Wal-Mart. The company flourished and Joe was able to buy a large mansion out in the country where he hoped to raise his children. He kept the penthouse in the city in case he had to work late, but most of the time he was able to drive home and read his kids their bedtime stories. Vanessa never aged a day, and Joe loved her with all his heart. He had finally fulfilled his dream, and life was good.

One day, Joe was finished with an important meeting and decided to clock out and drive home to surprise his children. He had forgotten what time the school day ended and arrived in the early afternoon at his mansion. A sleek, black sedan was in the driveway, and Joe didn’t know whose it was. He cracked open the front door slowly, and went straight to the bedroom without calling his wife’s name. Joe had a terrible feeling in his stomach. He threw the door to the master bedroom wide open and saw Vanessa in bed with the old CFO. He screamed obscenities at him and threw him out of his house. Vanessa tried to explain that it meant nothing, that she still loved him, but Joe would have none of it. He packed a bag, booked a plane ticket, called the office saying that he was taking a brief leave of absence, and drove to the airport, distraught. 

He boarded a plane destined for Hawai’i and watched as his home grew smaller and smaller in the distance. Joe decided he would stay in Hawai’i for a week to get his head straight and figure out what to do. When the plane arrived the next day, Joe found a five-star hotel right next to the beach. The view was lovely, and every morning before the sun was at its hottest, he would walk along the waves and think about his life. He was troubled, but at the same time he was proud of himself and what he had made of himself. Joe wasn’t sure what to do.

One morning, he passed a young, beautiful woman walking the other way. She was a Fruit Loop, like himself, and though she was not as pretty as Vanessa, she was still breathtaking. Joe stopped, introduced himself, and offered to take her up to a favorite bar by the beach for some fruit juice. The Fruit Loop said her name was Merlot and that she, too, was on vacation. They had a few drinks and talked all afternoon; they told each other their darkest secrets and, by sunset, Joe felt like he knew Merlot better than he had ever known his wife. As the moon was rising, they kissed under the stars, and Joe took Merlot back to his hotel room.

The next day, they both walked along the water. The passed the same bar they had stopped at the day before, and a sign hung in the window: 

“We’re closed for the Juice Festival on 3rd Street.”

The couple was puzzled, so the walked hand in hand to the location the sign specified. A large, frightening bouncer-Applejack stood in the doorway, so Joe gave him a tip and he let them in. The party inside was loud and exciting. Along the far wall, rows and rows of booths surrounded a buffet line. The music playing was so catchy, however, that Merlot dragged Joe onto the dancefloor. Hours passed, and they were soon tired. Looking for a place to sit, the picked a booth. They kissed again. Joe felt like a new breakfast cereal. 

Smells coming from the buffet were so enticing that they had to try a little of everything. They stood in line and chatted up some of the other vacationers who were there for the food and drink. Soon, all the salty food had rendered them both very thirsty. When Joe offered to go find the line for the juice they had seen advertised, he stood between the islands of food and looked around. He didn’t see any juice. There was no punch line.
What do you call someone who finds missing fruit and vegetables A private invegstigator

I'm beginning to suspect I might have bad posture call it a hunch
Why was 9 scared of 10 10 8 4 Ha
Apparently, 1 in 5 people in the world are Chinese. There are five people in my family, so it must be one of them. It's either my mum or my dad. Or my older brother, Colin. Or my younger brother, Ho-Chan-Chu. But I think it's Colin.

(Tim Vine)
What did the tool box say to the hammer? Toolsie!
On a hot afternoon, Scrooge the miser and his grandson, Tim, were walking home from a party. Tim complains, "Gramps, it's still a long way back to our house. It's hot and I'm tired. Look, there's a bus stop here. Can we please take the bus home?" 

Scrooge is aghast. "It'll cost us six dollars to get home from here! What a waste of money! We'll walk it." 

Tim sighs, but he's a good kid, and doesn't fuss about it. They barely walk a few feet, when Scrooge sees a passing taxi and hails it. 

"How much would you charge to take us home to Springfield Avenue?", Scrooge asks the cab driver. 

"Springfield Avenue? Around twenty bucks.", says the driver. 

"Oof! That's too much. We won't be requiring your services, thank you."

The cab drives off. Tim turns to his grandfather, exasperated. "Did you *really* think that a taxi to Springfield Avenue would cost less than a bus ride?", he asks, incredulously.

"Don't be ridiculous, of course not.", Scrooge scoffs.

"Then why did you bother flagging down the taxi, Gramps?!"

"Foolish boy! We would've saved $6 by not taking the bus, now we're saving $20 by not taking the taxi!"


How does a feminist change a light-bulb? Just kidding, feminists don't change shit.
It's time for you to decide! It's just amazing to me... the options we have as Americans and the stunning ignorance and failure in judgment that my fellow citizens continue to display.  We have the right to choose!  Yet, half of the country continues to stand by a deplorable option that has no respect for US citizens and is responsible for the maiming of multiple individuals and the destruction of private property!  No respect for women, children, or minorities... Yet, still (STILL) people will choose to stick with their Samsung Galaxy 7 Note..
Why is Papyrus taller then Sans? Because Papyrus drinks plenty of milk.
Whats an inmates favorite vegetable? Cellery.
My friend told me how electricity is measured and I was like Watt
March winds bring April Showers. April showers bring... Pilgrims.  On the Mayflower.
They read them up side down Why don't bats enjoy r/jokes?
Why don't robots have brothers? Because they all have trans-sisters
How many cops does it take to screw in a light-bulb? None, they just beat up the room for being black.
You must be made of copper and Tellurium because you are  Cu Te
Why are there no black CIA agents? Because you'd never be able to convince him to help the massive drug smuggling conspiracy that's shipping cocaine into his family's neighborhood.
[Long] A story of how two wooden planks became best friends Once upon a time, there were 2 wooden planks. The first one was named Chad, the second was named Carter. Chad hated Carter, and Carter hated Chad even more! One day, Chad was in a bar, drinking a tequila. Carter, drunk, came over to Chad and punched him as hard as a wooden plank could. Chad got angry and retaliated, kicking Carter in the face. They got into a bloody and violent bar fight. They both got arrested. They were sentenced to 8 months in jail, and a hefty fine for damages done to the bar. While in jail, Carter and Chad found that they had many similarities, and soon became best friends in jail. When they got out, they decided to start a business together. 
3 years later, Chad and Carter's Hardware store was very successful and they were making tons of money. But, one day, they realized that one of their suppliers had stopped shipping them products! And this wasn't even the first time that they have done this! The 2 wooden planks got very angry, and decided to go give the owner of the factory a piece of their mind. They went over to the factory, which was called, "Plank and Nail Industries." Chad thought that this name was a bit creepy. They entered the factory, and saw a quite normal looking lobby, with a quite normal looking wooden plank at the counter. "Hey", Chad said. "We would like to speak with your piece of trash manager." The clerk gave them a weird look, but picked up his phone nonetheless and called him. "Please wait 5 minutes while he comes down," he said. So they waited. The owner didn't come. "Where is he?" Carter said. "He is a very busy man," the clerk replied. They waited half an hour. Then 2 hours. Eventually even the clerk seemed very confused. 4 hours later, an angry Chad shouted, "Where is he!?" The clerk replied "I am really not sure. Please just wait a few more minutes." Chad sighed, and then looked to Carter. "How are you feeling?" Carter smacked his lips and said,

"I'm board"
What do you call a guy with a rubber toe? Roberto
Ken Cross' AMA That's it.
There was a 15 walking on the street, and he tried to cross the street, but this 4X4 ran him over and killed him.
Life is like a box of chocolates... It can be a load of shit.
My friend was about to get attacked by an incoming duck, so I tried to warn him... ...but it only made it worse.
No matter how kind you are ... German children will always be Kinder
Cooking is actually really easy for anyone to do It's just that most people don't have thyme.
Hitting the gym Hitting the gym to release stress it's not nearly effective as hitting the cunt that causes the fucking stress 
A blonde teenager wanting to earn some extra money... A blonde  teenager, wanting to earn some extra money for the summer, decided to hire  herself out as a "handy-woman"

She started  canvassing a nearby well-to-do neighborhood. She went to the front door of the  first house, and asked the owner if he had any odd jobs for her to  do.

"Well, I guess I  could use somebody to paint my porch," he said, "How much will you charge  me?"

Delighted, the  girl quickly responded, "How about $50?"

The man agreed and told her that the paint brushes and everything she would need was in the garage.

The man's wife, hearing the conversation said to her husband, "Does she realize that our porch  goes ALL the way around the house?"

He responded, "That's a bit cynical, isn't it?"

The wife replied, "You're right. I guess I'm starting to believe all those dumb blonde jokes we've been getting by email lately."

Later that day, the blonde teenager came to the door to collect her money.
"You're finished  already?" the startled husband asked.

"Yes, she replied, and I even had paint left over, so I gave it two coats." 

Impressed, the man reached into his pocket for the $50.00 and handed it to her along with a $10.00 tip.

“And, by the way," the teenager added, "it's not a Porch, it's a Lexus."
The only way to score with a robot Is to get it in the mode
I became a vegan yesterday... ...but I tell you, it was a missed-steak.
I decided to replace my belt with multiple watches connected together. It was a big waist of time.
There's a new activist movement that campaigns against violence and systemic racism toward people from Poland... It's called "Matter Lives Polish."
How can you tell you are dealing with an extroverted engineer? He's staring at somebody else's shoes.
Have you ever heard a deaf woman moan in pleasure? It sounds like pizza day in a special needs class.
Why did the chicken cross the road... To repost this joke
Why is 7 afraid of 6? Because he ain't got jack on him
What do the final scene of titanic and the iPhone 7 have in common? They both could've fit the jack
I have 6 mental illnesses Schizophrenia, OCD, ADHD, dislexia, anxiety, and hypochondria.
I've seen some bad thieves in my life before... But this one couldn't even take the cake!
What do you say to an overworked clothing maker? You seamstressed.
A boy is selling fish at the local intersection in town... "Dam fish! Get your dam fish here!", the boy shouts.

A priest walks by, totally confused, so he decides to ask the boy what the problem is.

"Son, why are you calling them 'damn fish"? What did they do to you?"

"I caught these fish at the local dam, so I'm selling them as dam fish!", he replies.

"Oh, now that makes sense!", says the priest. "I'll take two then!"

Later that night the priest gets home, slams the two fish down on the counter and tells his wife to "cook the dam fish".

"I didn't know it was appropriate for a priest to speak like that.", says his wife.

The priest explains to his wife that they were caught at the local damn. "Oh, okay then!", she says, and proceeds to cook the fish for dinner.

Later that night at dinner, the priest, his wife, and son are sitting around the dinner table. The priest says to his son, "Son, pass the dam fish."

Son: "That's the spirit dad! Now pass the fucking potatoes!"
What did one snowman say to the other? "Weird...I smell carrots, too."
What are caterpillars afraid of? Doggerpillars.
"We choose to go to the moon not because it is easy... ...but because it is cheesy."
How do you keep an erection? Don't fuck with it
How many dogs does it take to change a light bulb? Are you fking retarded, dogs can't change light bulbs...
I told the cashier at McDonald's that there's some cute girls here. I asked her if she could get them out of the ball pit for me. 

---------------------------------------------------


EDIT: Shout out to /u/alrightiwillbite for wording the punchline a bit better.
I lost my watch at a party once Saw a guy stepping on it while sexually harassing a girl. I walked up to the dude, punched him straight in the nose. No one does that to a girl, not on my watch.
To this day I remember the time my mom forgot to pick me up from school. The school was already empty, only the janitors were left. I cried but they gave me milk and cookies and told me that everything will be all right. Worst high school experience ever...
RIP Boiled Water ... You will be mist
What's a cop's favorite tv show? The Blacklist 
If you have a sexy salad, what do you put on it? Hidden Valley Raunch
Sheriffs discover a dead black man in the woods... ... with 75 stab wounds and 36 gunshots to the chest. Sheriffs report it as the worst suicide they've ever seen.
Where does the king keep his armies? Up his sleevies
I made a new mixtape, it was trash Until I played it on my new galaxy note 7, then it was fire
[JOKE] Why did the guitar teacher get arrested? For fingering A minor. 
What did JFK say to his driver? It's a good day to take the top off
What did the Jewish Mexican call his non-Jewish friends? His amigoys.
Why are gingers' feet so rough? Because they have no soles 
Flying is like throwing yourself at the ground... ...and miss.

Quote by Douglas Adams.

Edit: I think this is more of a shower thoughts thing.
How can you tell the introverts from the extroverts at the NSA? The extroverts stare at your shoes. Sorry, IC joke.
So a deaf girl hit on me today... It was a sign
Studies show that Kangaroos can jump higher than a house. Then again, houses can't jump at all.
Why is it that men tend to get better looking with age while women get worse? Because a man being old means he is smart, tough, or lucky and should have genes passed on.

A woman being old means she can't have kids so she gets ugly  to tell men not waste their time and sperm on her
Why does Piglett smell nasty? He plays with Pooh.
What's Irish and stays out all year? Patty O'furniture.
Death of the Family Although filled with many memorable moments, Scott Snyder's Bat-Family epic "Death of the Family" featured a perfect Joker gag near the end of the event. After capturing the members of the Bat-Family, the Joker had Alfred serve them up some platters topped with their faces... which he had cut off. It's a really freaky moment, but the real punchline comes afterward and perfectly encapsulates the Joker's twisted sense of humor.
Why do people like Hillary Clinton? When she can't even stand herself? 
A fireman, an old man, a smart woman and santa... are in a room. The lights go down for a few seconds and the old man is found dead, stabbed in the back. Who killed him?
The fireman, because smart women and santa don't exist.
Bill Cosby awarded another honorary degree from Boston University, this time is was Anesthesiology.
I never liked camping It's too intents
What happens when you shoot a black man? You go to jail for impersonating a police officer...
What do you call a chocolate travelling at 100mph? A ferrari rocher.
Moscow cops Did you hear the one about why Moscow cops patrol in threes?

One who can read, one who can write, and another to keep an eye on the other two "dangerous intellectuals".
Why wasn't Jesus born in the USA? Because God couldn't find three wise men and a virgin.
What's a redditors worst fear? [OC]
Best bar ever Three friends are having beers and start comparing the greatest bars.
The first says "I once went to a bar where they gave you a free beer for each beer you buy." 
The next says "That's nothing, I once went to a bar where they gave a free beer and a free shot for each beer you buy."
The last guy says "Well I've heard of a bar where they let you drink as much as you want for free and then take you in the back room and get you laid."  
"Wow," the first friend responds, "you've actually been to this bar?" 
The third guy answers "I haven't... but my sister has."
A Woman Gets On a Bus With Her Baby A woman gets on a bus with her baby. The bus driver says: ''Ugh, that's the ugliest baby I've ever seen!'' The woman walks to the rear of the bus and sits down, fuming. She says to a man next to her: ''The driver just insulted me!'' The man says: ''You go up there and tell him off. Go on, I'll hold your monkey for you.''
GASSY GRANNY An old lady goes to the doctor and says, "I have this problem with frequent gas. Fortunately, the farts never smell and are always silent. As a matter of fact, I've farted at least 10 times since I've been here, and I bet you didn't even notice!"

The doctor says, "I see. Take these pills and come back next week."
The next week the old lady returns. "Doctor," she says, "I don't know what the hell you gave me, but now my silent farts stink like the dickens."

The doctor says, "Good! Now that we've cleared up your sinuses, let's work on your hearing."
Walks into a pub and asks the bar man !!! Guy walks into a pub and asks the bar man for a pint;
"That will be $0.05 please sir".
"Wow, in that case I will have a shot of whisky too"
"Certainly, that will be $0.03 sir".
"Damnnn, OK and a packet of crisps".
"0.01 please sir, $0.08 all together".
"This is astonishing, can I speak to the owner of this place, I'd like to thank him".
"Oh, not just now, he is busy, he is upstairs with my wife".
"...What is he doing upstairs with your wife?"
"Same thing I am doing down here with his business".
What do you call three potassiums? Racist
Two military men walk into a bathroom... One from the Army. One from the Marines. They both go pee, and finish around the same time.  But only the Marine goes to the sink to wash his hands. Just before the Army guy left, the Marine stopped him and said: "Hey, aren't you going to wash your hands? In the Marines, we were taught to wash our hands after pissing."  The Army guy laughed, "Well, in the Army, we were taught not to piss on ours." Then, he left.

(a favorite joke from my Uncle (Army - MSG).  Had to share. RIP)

*This is a joke, and in no way reflects my opinion of any branch of the US military...I love and appreciate all of you*
Going Sane A storyline running in Legends of the Dark Knight #65-68, the Joker thinks he finally killed Batman, which causes him to go completely sane, because you know, the Joker. Deciding to lead a normal life, he has plastic surgery to fix his whole face problem and he even manages to find a little romance. However, he apparently decided to throw one last joke in before completely leading a normal life with the name he chose for himself: Joseph Kerr.
Coordinate geometry is terrible. I failed the last test, but it turns out that the next unit continues it. Will I ever get distance from it?
Let me tell you something about women. Take my wife... ...please?
On my wedding day my new father in law said to me On my wedding day back in the hotel room I sat my bride down, took my pants off and handed them to my wife and asked her to put them on. She did, and they fell off. Again she tried over and over, she said they don't fit. I told her that's right, I wear the pants in this family. She took off her panties and gave them to me and said put them on. I tried and tried but couldn't get into them. I said they I can't get into them, she said and you won't get into them unless you change your attitude .

Credit: I saw this on Huffington Post comment section by Michael Drena.
You know my phone be blowin' up! Posted via samsung galaxy note 7. 
A magician is preforming on a cruise ship His act was pretty good, but the captain had a parrot that could talk who was pretty smart and knew how the magician did most of his tricks. The parrot would declare them to the audience as the magician performed, thus ruining many of his acts; "Squawk! He's puttin it in his sleeves! Squawk! He hid it behind his fingers!" After weeks of putting up with this annoying bird, the magician finally snaps during one of his performances, pulls a pistol out of his back pocket and attempts to shoot the parrot. Unfortunately, the bullet missed the parrot and hit a propane tank on the ship's deck, causing it to explode and blow the ship to a million pieces. The only two apparent survivors are the magician and the parrot, stuck on a piece of wood floating out among the debris of the wreck. After about an hour of tense silence, the parrot says "OK, I give up. Where's the damn boat?!"
What do you call 'looking for a Korean'? Seoul searching
My sister just admitted that she broke my best lamp, I’m not sure I’ll be able look at her in the same light ever again..
Hey guys, I made a haiku! I have some news that
Could get Hillary Clinton
Arreste--

_[deleted]_
Someone told me that to be successful in my business, I should hire people smarter than me... Others said I'm setting the bar too low.
Do you know what the women are saying after an orgasm... Apparently you don't know...
I've got two kids, jane and emma, they get bullied at school. 
I can't make it stop but i can help them rise above it. The other day i said to them, “Look, boys…”
So a neutron walks into a bar... ...And he asks the bartender "How much for a drink?"

The bartender replies, "For you? Free of charge"
I master' 'Bates william's  principal 
How does Moses get his tea ready? Hebrews 
What's the difference between a human and a bullet? Humans miss Harambe.
I woke up to the ghost of Gloriya Gaynor in my room last night At first I was afraid, I was petrified...
Three buddies watching Sunday night football. An ant, a spider, and a centipede are watching Sunday night football together at the ants’ house. The ant notices their beer supply is running low, so being a good host he tells his buddies he is going to run to the beer store to get more. While the ant was heading out the centipede stops him and says “hey let me go and get the beer, I will be much faster than you, I have more legs, I’m built for speed” the ant thought this guy is too full of himself but lets him go get the beer anyways. It then started to rain, an hour & half passes, the spider and the ant got worried because the centipede has been gone far too long now. The spider tells the ant “ok I will go out and see if I can find him.” The spider puts on his shoes, grabs an umbrella and starts to head out. When the spider opens the door, surprisingly there is the centipede at the front door. “Hey man, what took you so long? Where’s the beer?”  Centipede looks up and responds “huh! I haven’t even finished putting on all my shoes yet.”
My friend told me to hold his keys. I said, "I'm not your keyper."
Why did the kettle get the job rather than the bowl? Because he had senioriTEA!
An old man asks his doctor for a half dose of Viagra Doc: I'm afraid that a half dose won't quite be enough 

Old man: Oh I don't want a full erection. I just want a little lift so I stop peeing on my shoes!
Tell y'all what I know about dwarfs.. Very little.
My brother is so dumb.  He was complaining about jockeys squeezing his balls. I told him to try boxers. He came back and said, no their hands are too rough.
we don't want to have children anymore Me and my wife decided that we don't want to have children anymore. So anybody who wants one can leave us their phone number and address and we will bring you one.
I heard paralympic basketball players are very selfish, they never pass All they do is dribble.
A Gummy Bear in A New School So, a gummy bear goes to a new school and being the softy that he is he's a bit fearful of being there but soon makes friends with a blue M&M who reassures him that his got nothing to be afraid of because if anything happened the M&M would be there to protect him and seeing as he, the M&M, had this really hard shell and was tough he would be up to the task.

The next day while standing in a food line the Jakemans Honey and Lemon walks straight up to the Gummy Bear, smacks his food tray out of his hands and beats the crap out of him and all the while the M&M is hiding in the corner trying to look inconspicuous.

After a good and solid beating the Gummy Bear drags his, now even more, squishy body over to the corner where the blue M&M was still trying to blend into the yellow cafeteria wall and asks him why he did not come to his aid heroically as he promised?

The M&M replies 'Sorry kid, but he's f*ing menthol!'
Donald Duck wanted a divorce for Daisy His lawyer tells Donald, "I am sorry, but you can't divorce Daisy just because she is insane."

Donald replies, "I never said she was insane. I said that she was fucking Goofy."
Einstein walks into a bar The bartender says "Run, everyone! It's a zombie!"
What's the same about an election and an erection? They're only one letter different, and both are about a dick rising to power.
What do you call a nun in a wheelchair? Virgin Mobile
I bought a car and it had too many manufacturing defects, so I sold it off to another unsuspecting customer for an even higher price. When life gives you lemons, gotta make lemonade.
A man asks a farmer near a field A man asks a farmer near a field, “Sorry sir, would you mind if I crossed your field instead of going around it? You see, I have to catch the 4:23 train.”

The farmer says, “Sure, go right ahead. And if my bull sees you, you’ll even catch the 4:11 one.
René Descartes walks into a bar. The bartender asks, "Would you care for a drink?"
Descartes replies, "Hmm, I think not."
René Descartes does not exist.
Difference between Hitler and Usain Bolt... Usain managed to finish a race while Hitler couldn't.
A birdwatcher and his friend were walking through Central Park. A bird tweets and the birdwatcher identifies it and then turns to a tree and says, 'There it is.'   
His friend says, 'That's amazing. How did you hear that over the noise of all these people around us?'  
The birdwatcher says, 'It's all in what you want to hear. Watch.'  

He whispers, 'Want to fuck, baby?'  

Female heads all through the crowd turn to look at them.


A man walks into a store And he ordered 'a table'

The bartender replies with 'this is a bar, not a furniture shop'
What did Achilles say when he got hit by an arrow? Aww heel no!






Kill me right now.

What's a Pirates favorite production studio? 
PixARRRGGHHHH 
(you saw this coming) 
A boy comes home after school one day A boy comes home after school one day. His mother notices that he’s got a big smile on his face.
She asks, “Did anything special happen at school today?”

“Yes, Mom. I had sex with my English teacher!”

The mother is stunned. “You’re going to talk about this with your father when he gets home.”
Well, when dad comes home and hears the news he is pleased as punch.

 Beaming with pride, he walks over to his son and says, “Son, I hear you had sex with your English teacher.”
“That’s right, Dad.”

“Well, you became a man today—this is cause for celebration. Let’s head out for some ice cream, and then I’ll buy that new bike you’ve been asking for.”

“That sounds great, Dad, but can I have a football instead? My ass is killing me.”
How many Missouri cops does it take to change a lightbulb? Doesn't matter, they just sit in the blackness and shoot at it.
A guy comes home one day to find his girlfriend packing her stuff. "Where the hell do you think you're going!?"

She replies "I know all about you! You're a paedophile!"

He says "Ooooh! Big word for an eight year old!"
NSFW Squirting "Squirting isn't a real thing is it, it's just pee, right?"

Interviewer: "I meant questions about the job". 
What did Hodor say to the king? Hodor 
What's the most racist part of a quadratic equation? The discriminant.
TIL that if you took out every vein in your body and laid them end to end, they would wrap around the world at least four times. Unfortunately you wouldn't get to see it, because you'd be dead.
Hearthstone is... ...a competitive eSports game.
Why did little Timmy cry when grandpa talked to him in his last moments on his death bed? Because, so grandpa told him, "every single one of us will die and have our consciousness wiped out forever from existence. Never to feel anything again. All our lives and memories will be forgotten, for some in just one generation, for others in a few more. But even the most famous people will fade either when our sun burns out or the heatdeath of the universe.


My friend and I were arguing which Counter Strike map is better, de_dust or cs_office? He won't stop arguing with me. We had to settle it immediately, so we asked a passerby, which is better? He eventually chose de_dust.
I was a little surprised, I wasn't expecting him to choose that. Another one bites de_dust. O well
Abraham Lincoln is one of the least guilty presidents of all time! He was in-a-cent!
Years ago, there was a small group of missionaries... ...They set out to find a new homeland for their brand of Christianity. They left Vermont with little to their name, only the clothes on their backs and a song in their heart. As they traveled, they would sing for their meals. In these days there weren’t what we would consider restaurants, but instead people would gather at the local public house. 
 Since our missionaries were, well, religious, their peak performances would occur Sunday mornings, when they were thinking the most about the glory of God. As they moved forward in their travels, word preceded them from town to town, so it came to be that when they would get to a new town, they would be inundated with requests for this hymn or that. In many towns, the people had little to give the performers, and the chorus would simply request an apple for each of the singers. In this way, our little religious singing group came to be known as the Morning Tavern Apple Choir. 

she wants a BMW.” A small boy was awoken in the middle of the night by strange noises from his parents’ room, and he decided to investigate.  As he entered their bedroom, he was shocked to see his mom and dad shagging for all they were worth. “DAD!” he shouted. “What are you doing?” “It’s ok,” his father replied. “Your mother wants a baby, that’s all.” The small boy, excited at the prospect of a new baby brother, was pleased and went back to bed with a smile on his face.  Several weeks later, the little boy was walking past the bathroom and was shocked to discover his mother giving oral gratification to his father. “DAD!” he shouted. “What are you doing now?” “Son, there’s been a change of plan,” his father replied. “Your mother did want a baby, but now she wants a BMW.”
How many introverts does it take to change a lightbulb? Why does it have to be a group activity?
A Russian officer is giving his cadets a lesson about chemistry. He says: "Cadets, write down: the temperature of boiling water is 90°."

One of the privates replies, "Comrade praporshchik, you're mistaken — it's 100°!" 

The officer consults his handbook, and then announces, "Right, 100°. It is a *right angle* that boils at 90°."
What's Technology's Favorite Candle? The Samsung Note 7
Two kids were wondering if God is black or white.. So they prayed and asked him. A booming voice from the heavens answered "I am what I am." One kid said, "Well, I guess he's white." The other said, "How can you tell?"   "Well, if he was black, he would've answered,  'I is what I is.'"
I had a cow that was afraid of everything Coward was her name.
What do you call the wife of the first neckbeard president? First M'lady
The privileged hangman is a sophisticated fellow. He can read, write and has a permission to execute.
For example you're chain smoker but your cigarette packet is finished and you have no money, because last date of the month. What do you at the time? For example you're chain smoker but your cigarette packet is finished and you have no money, because last date of the month. What do you at the time?
Did you here about the girl who got electrocuted by her vibrator at a sleep over? It was such a buzz kill
The Glue Truck A truck owned by a commercial glue company is driving through London when it accidentally collides with a lamp post, causing it to swerve out of control and flip on its side. During this collision, the tank holding the glue explodes and 1000kg of glue falls upon a poor pedestrian. He's firmly stuck to the road.

A crowd gathers around the helpless pedestrian, all wanting a look at the man and thinking about how to help him, although he's in a sticky situation that looks quite inescapable.

The 1000kg of glue is taking its toll on the mans body and he manages to squeak out the words "please... I don't think I have long left.". The crowd looks shocked when another man decides to take action and shouts "Everyone quiet! Now please, is anyone here a fireman, a body builder, an engineer, anything that could help this poor man?" 

At just this moment the crowd parts like the Red Sea, as a young women crawls through to the front where the man is stuck to the floor.

"Madam, can you or do you know of any way to help this man?" 

After a long minute of panting the women finally opens her mouth.

"No... I just wanted to say I'm also glue-tonne intolerant."
It's not possible to have a 12 inch penis... because then it would be considered a foot. 
What super hero league would Caitlyn Jenner be a member of? The X men!
Calling 911 When coming home from a very late shift at night...

Charles: I'd like to call and report a fire. [Lives in a fire prone 
area and it was the season.]

911: Where is it located sir?

Charles: On the hillside just East of [City].

911: Can you be more specific? [Typing away in the background.]

Charles: Yes, [gives a more detailed location]. Oh god, it's getting bigger!

911: Stay calm sir, we're sending somebody out.

Charles: It's getting bigger! Oh god! Oh...oh, wait...

911: Sir?

Charles: I am SO sorry...I'm not usually out this time of night, I just got off work late...that's, that's the sun...

911: ...

Charles: I am so, so sorry for wasting your time, there is no fire, that's just the sun rising. Never mind. I'm really embarrassed...

911: That's fine, Sir. I will cancel the call, thank you for calling.
I keep hearing so much talk about ISIS right now... They're really blowing up.
Dyslexic Terrorists Showed up on 11-9.
Why is Steam called Steam? Because the servers are always steaming hot
"Don't knock it till you tried it!" Doesn't help your defence in court.
If only women would fucking listen!!! A man was driving down a road.

A woman was driving up the same road.

The man shouts out of the window loud, "Big Fat Cow!!"

The woman yells in response, "Fucking Wanker!!"

The woman turns around at the corner and crashes onto a big cow and dies!!
How come I didn't get upset when the Indian restaurant got my order wrong? It was a Naan issue
Women are like magnets... I have no clue how they work.
Two Foxconn employees were in the breakroom when they notice an iPhone 7 prototype on the counter.

One of them says to the other, "I bet I could get a lot of money if I leak that to the press. Should I take it?"

The other says, "No. Don't jack it."
My blonde girlfriend went missing for a month and just showed up, apparently pregnant and infected with syphilis. And she blames me! All because we were discussing politics and I said "Fuck all those Republicans!"
My blonde girlfriend went missing for a month and just showed up, apparently pregnant and infected with syphilis. And she blames me! All because we were discussing politics and I said "Fuck all those Republicans!"
How do you save a pirate's life? C P Arrr!
So, a penguin is driving down the road... So, a penguin is driving down the road in his truck. His truck starts to sputter, so he pulls into a town and finds a mechanic shop. The mechanic says, "Well Mr. Penguin you should go downtown and get something to eat while I see what is wrong with your truck here."
"Great idea!" says Mr. Penguin, "I am famished."
So, the penguin starts walking do- well, waddling down town, and he sees an ice cream shop. Everyone knows that penguins fuckin' love ice cream so he orders an ice cream cone. He starts to eat it, but it gets all over his beak and face, because he doesn't have any opposable thumbs, he is a penguin.
He starts to wal- ddle back to the mechanic shop. The mechanic, who is just finishing up, rolls out from under the truck and says to the penguin, "Well Mr. Penguin, it looks like you blew a seal."
The penguin shrugs and replies, "Nah, that is just a bit of ice cream."
The difference between Usain Bolt and Hitler. Usain Bolt managed to finish a race while Hitler couldn't.
People make such a big deal about vegans, but I don't get it. I've never had a beef with one.
What's typically orange, has a green top, is pointed at one end, grows in the ground, and is normally 15-30cm long? You tell me, I don't carrot all
I am a very innocent guy. One day, I was on the bus standing next to a lady. She was constantly bumping into me in an indecent way. I was getting aroused in an uncomfortable way. After a while she said,

"Oh I am very sorry"

"umm.... it's.. it's...okay. I have no hard feelings."
What's the best way to kill your Mother-in-law? "No idea, your Honor". 
Why are there no jews on jupiter Because its a gas planet
My ex-girlfriend is like a chocolate She killed my dog
I keep making jokes about my dads new Thai bride. He's getting pretty sick of them. My dads getting sick of them too.
I've decided to leave my past behind me.. So if I owed you money- I'm sorry but I've moved on.
Oh great. I forgot to pack an apple in my lunch... ...and now there are doctors EVERYWHERE!!
They should sell Dragonball themed mayonnaise... ...call it Kameha-Mayo.
Keep away from professional dermatologists.. They make rash decisions 
Amazon should sue Samsung.... For infringing on the copyrights of their Kindle and Fire.
When you play poker with a cowboy, it's gonna get serious. You can bet your boots. 
"Bite me, asshole" "Bite me, asshole" - grammatically correct and scathing     
"Bite me asshole" - kinky pirate
Why was 7 afraid of 8? Because may be 8 didn't have charging jack
What's Clint Eastwoods favourite make of car? Audi, partner. 
I used to do ballet I still do, but I used tutu.
Cheaper Pub in the World Guy walks into a pub and asks the bar man for a pint; 

"That will be $0.05 please sir". 

"Wow, in that case I will have a shot of whisky too"

"Certainly, that will be $0.03 sir". 

"Damnnn, OK and a packet of crisps". 

"0.01 please sir, $0.08 all together". 

"This is astonishing, can I speak to the owner of this place, I'd like to thank him". 

"Oh, not just now, he is busy, he is upstairs with my wife". 

"...What is he doing upstairs with your wife?"

"Same thing I am doing down here with his business".


What do you call a cowgirl in leather panties? Chapped lips.
Lake County What is about Lake County? In just the last year, cops have arrested people within a hundred yards of here for murder, attempted murder, robbery, attempted rape (and attempted rape of the rapist), drunk & disorderly, indecent exposure, possession of fireworks with intent to sell, arson, assault and battery, arson again, unlawful imprisonment and detainer, public urination, glue huffing & related paper bag offenses and jaywalking.
And God knows what the neighbors are up to.

Ladies, if your man stops the opposing team from scoring a goal... He's a keeper
A Husband came home late at night from the office one day and realised he forgot his Wife's birthday... "How would you feel if you don't see me for next few days?" His wife said  
  
He couldn't believe his luck. He replied at once. "Wowww.....That would be great!''  
  
Monday passed & he didn't see her....  
  
Tuesday he didn't see her...  
  
and Wednesday passed too...  
  
On Thursday the swelling was better as he caught a glimpse of her from the corner of his left eye.
What did one casket say to the other casket? "Is that you coffin?'
TIL that the term "A stroke of luck" has more than one meaning- -when my fortune teller gave me a handjob. 
How many people at a Music Festival does it take to screw in a light bulb? Zero, its already lit
My girlfriend asked me to stop singing Oasis songs. I said maybe.
A man with a speech impediment goes shopping A man with a speech impediment goes to the shops with his cocker spaniel to buy some things he needs around the house. He first visits a hardware store, tying the dog up outside. Upon arriving, he asks where he can find the "fuckets". The lady asks if he means "buckets", to which he replies "Yef, that's what I thed, a fucket".

After he buys his bucket, he decides to have some lunch. He goes to a hotdog stand and asks for "a hotdog on a bum wif kethup and muftad". The lady looks at him strangely, but sells him a hotdog on a bun. He pays for it while juggling the dog's leash and the bucket, then strolls off, ready to head home.

As he's walking, his dog catches sight of some pigeons and wants to give chase. The man, unable to juggle lunch and his new red bucket, accidentally lets go of the lead, and the dog goes bolting towards the group of birds on the ground.

Knowing he's unable to do everything at once, he turns to the lady nearby and handing her the food and pail, asks her:

"Will you hold my bum and fucket, while I go get my cock and spanket?"

(Told to me by my cousin years ago, felt I needed to share it)
Whats the difference between a woman and a floppy drive? A Floppy Drive can only take 3.5" Inches.



Girls always think I'm ugly until they see what's in my bank account Then they think I'm ugly AND poor
Hidden desire A girl at a bus stop spotted a handsome man and without hesitation went to him and said ” you look cute.. I like you.”…. The man out of shock simply placed his hand on her shoulder and said “My dear, this love and infatuation are all nothing. You are too young to be behaving like this. Pls go home and study hard so that you can have a successful life.”
He then placed a piece of paper on her hand and said ” I have written some words of wisdom and bible verses for you. Read them before you go to sleep.” And then he walked away.

The girl went back to her hostel in shame and before she slept she opened up the paper and read thus: “Are you blind? My wife was standing behind me. Any way, this is my number. Call me anytime…… By the way, I like you too!”
How do you dispose of a child's dead body? Oh shit this isn't Google
Why do all Muslims have circumcisions? Tips off for haram bae.
Statistics show that six out of seven dwarfs... ...aren't happy.
Three cats went swimming in the Seine.. Un deux trois quatre cinq
Why was the house burning? Because it was set on fire.
I argued constantly with my boss, so in the end I got the sack 
And buried him in it.
Did you know? A group of jellyfish is commonly referred to as "a group of jellyfish." 
Right now my wife’s in the garden with two of my exes, 
I’ll get the champagne chilled then put a patio on them.
Divorce is tough on some kids. 
Others are just happy to be single again.
Women need security 
-when I’m around.
It must be pretty bad being the wife of a suicide bomber... Because if they come home after work, they've had a bad day.
One day in History class, 
Miss Lewis asked, ‘If you were a historical figure, who would you be? Michael, let’s start with you.’  
‘I would be Napoleon, Miss Lewis, because I’m fearless, adventurous and ground breaking.’  
‘Very good, Michael.’  
‘And I miss,’ said Brad, ‘I would be Buddha — selfless, calm and meditative.’  
‘Excellent, Brad. And Jimmy, what about you?’  
‘Hermione Granger, Miss.’  
‘Oh, why’s that?’  
‘I can’t be fucked.’  
My uncle always said I was too soft. 
But I just didn’t fancy him.
Baby you are like a white dwarf star.... Extremely hot but not very bright
A genie and an idiot Three guys stranded on a desert island find a magic lantern containing a genie, who grants them each one wish. The first guy wishes he was off the island and back home. The second guy wishes the same. The third guy says: ‘I’m lonely. I wish my friends were back here.’

When’s the worst time to eat candy? 
When she’s on her period.
Interviewer: How would you handle a complaint from a customer? Applicant: Well that depends, what's the complaint?

Interviewer: He's complaining that his burger had onions on it, even though he specifically asked they were to be removed.

Applicant: Well I'd start by telling him he's in the retail section.
I recently met a Chinese man and his name was Kannaswami. I asked him: "How did you ever get a name like that being a Chinese?"

He said: "Many, many years ago when I first went to USA, I was standing in line at the Political Asylums Immigration Counter. The man in front of me was a Sri Lankan Tamil refugee. 
The white lady at the counter looked at him and asked "What is your name?" He replied "Kannaswami". 
 
Then she looked at me and asked "What's your name?"

I said, "Sem Ting".
What do T-Rex's do for a living? They're small arms dealers. 
Why was 6 afraid of 7? Because 7 didn't have a removable battery and blew up in everybody's pocket
I had just left from a friends house and decided to stop and grab a 6 pack of beer for my way home. After about 5 I had to stop and take a piss. So I pulled over and took a piss on the side of the road. When I finished I zipped my pants and went to turn around and there was a police officer standing behind me. He saw the empty cans in the car and he said, "Young man I'm gonna give you two choices...1. A DUI Ticket or 2. Indecent Exposure". Well hell, I took the 2nd choice. 2 weeks later at court the judge said the ticket for Indecent Exposure was $900... yes that is right, 900 big ones... $100 for every inch.

- Another from my uncle who sends weekly emails with jokes to friends of his.
I saw on the news that there was a car on the wrong side of the road on the highway So I called my grandfather, who I knew was on that road! I told him, "be careful, I heard there's a car on the wrong side of the road!"

"It's not just one car! Every single car is traveling the wrong way!"
"It was a misunderstanding, your honor" says a man who is in court for indecent exposure. "Explain the statement," the judge demanded. "Well you see this girl and I were drinking at the bar and she asked me what I wanted most in a woman --- so I showed her"

- Got this one from my uncle, never heard it before
What was Hitler's favorite animal? Da cow
I tried to catch fog the other day I mist 
You were so beautiful,  until your 30 day trial of photoshop ended.
If my Sky Internet gets any slower  by the time this video has downloaded the girl in it will be legal.

How do you tell if your friend is gay? Fuck him in the ass. As you're cumming, reach around and feel his cock. It's hard, he's definitely gay.