I got fired from my job at Whole Foods They caught me selling half foods!!!
Squaring numbers is just like girls If they're under 13, just do them in your head
How many vampires does it take to screw in a lightbulb? It depends if you Count Dracula.
What is the worst part of having sex with a 4 year old? Getting the blood out of the clown costume can be such a bitch
My girlfriend and I were about to go for a late night walk. Her dad said, "Don't forget to wrap up."

I said, "Don't be silly, she's on the pill."

Do you want to satisfy your hardcore food fetish? Buy my new book: 50 Shades of Grey Poupon
Why can't Americans watch Lord of the Rings? They don't have the Two Towers.
TIL Donald Trump played Football when he was in college. He played de fence.
A young man and his date were parked... ... on a back road some distance from town. 
They were about to have sex when the girl stopped.
“I really should have mentioned this earlier, but I’m actually a hooker and I charge $20 for sex.” 
The man reluctantly paid her, and they did their thing.
After a cigarette, the man just sat in the driver’s seat looking out the window. 
“Why aren’t we going anywhere?” asked the girl.
“Well, I should have mentioned this before, but I’m actually a taxi driver, and the fare back to town is $25…”

According to a radio report, a middle school in Oregon was faced with a unique problem. A number of girls were beginning to use lipstick and would put it on in the bathroom. That was fine, but after they put on their lipstick, they would press their lips to the mirror leaving dozens of little lip prints.

Finally, the principal decided that something had to be done. She called all the girls to the bathroom and met them there with the maintenance man. She explained that all these lip prints were causing a major problem for the custodian who had to clean the mirrors every night. To demonstrate how difficult it was to clean the mirrors, she asked the maintenance guy to clean one of the mirrors. He took out a long-handled squeegee, dipped it into the toilet and then cleaned the mirror.

Since then there have been no lip prints on the mirror.
Told an inmate to have a safe drive home. I'm a corrections officer, getting ready to head out at shift change:

Inmate: "drive home safe"
Me: "yeah you too..."
Me: (thinking "oops, ouch")
Coworker: "Muahahaha"
Inmate: (hops into his imaginary car and shuffles to his cell making farting engine noises, screeches the brakes, steps out of his car and into his cell. Pokes his head out) "Made it home safe dad" 
Me and my coworker burst out laughing 
What's a Viking leaders pleasure? Leif Blower
I once bought condoms the day before a girl I was dating broke up with me. I suffer from premature emasculation.
A man was stopped by a game warden in Northern Michigan.. A man was stopped by a game warden in Northern Michigan recently with two buckets of fish leaving a lake well known for its fishing. The game warden asked the man, “Do you have a license to catch those fish?” The man replied to the game warden, “No, sir. These are my pet fish.”

“Pet fish?!” the warden replied.

“Yes, sir. Every night I take these here fish down to the lake and let them swim around for a while. I whistle and they jump back into their buckets, and I take ’em home.”

“That’s a bunch of hooey! Fish can’t do that!”

The man looked at the game warden for a moment, and then said, “Here, I’ll show you. It really works.”

“O.K. I’ve GOT to see this!”

The game warden was curious now. The man poured the fish into the lake and stood and waited. After several minutes, the game warden turned to the man and said “Well?”

“Well, what?” the man responded.

“When are you going to call them back?” the game warden prompted.

“Call who back?” the man asked.

“The FISH.”

“What fish?” the man asked.
Today is a ballerinas favorite day... Its 2-2
I never knew my ex wanted me back so much. In fact, today he called me "white trash" because he just had to take me out.
What's the same about the force and herpes? They will be with you, always.
If sneezing means someone's thinking about you... I guess that explains why I never got sick before
Whats clean and dirty at the same time? A single guy just out of the shower.
Why do magicians never perform tricks behind windows? Because they are a pane to do tricks behind. 
What do you call a singing computer? A-Dell
Why are there so many bakeries in the Deep South ? Because all the people down there are inbred 
MOMMY MOMMY, I DONT WANT TO VISIT GRAMPA! Shut up and keep digging...
You know who's a real lady killer? David Berkowitz (aka Son of Sam)
What does a dog get after going to college? A pedigree. 
Tourettes I took my wife to the doctors today to sort out her tourettes. Turns out she doesnt have it, I actually am a cunt and she really does want me to fuck off.
Blonde woman walks into a library Walks up to the front counter, sees the attendant and says 
'Hello there, I'll have a burger and a large fries please'
The attendant, politely responds 
'I'm sorry love, but this is actually a library'
Mortified and red faced the blonde lady looks around and whispers back 
'I'm so sorry, I'll have a burger and large fries please'
Viagra Viagra should be classified as a hard drug.
Heaven's New Rule God was sitting with St. Peter and let him know of a new rule he wanted to implement. "If someone's last day on Earth is terrible, they get one more day."

St. Peter was standing at the Pearly Gates ready to enact Heaven's new rule when the first soul approached.

St. Peter said "My son, tell me about your last day on Earth"

First Guy "St. Peter you wouldn't believe my last day on Earth!  So I get home early from work and go to my 19th floor apartment. I open the door and there's a trail of men and women's clothes leading to my bedroom. There on the bed was my wife naked and sweaty. You bitch! You're cheating on me!? I screamed.  So I tore through the apartment looking for the guy. I looked under the bed and in the closet, no one was there. On my way to check the living room I see two hands hanging onto my balcony railing. I throw open the sliding door and start kicking the hands and yelling at the guy. He falls 19 floors and hits the ground, but he's still squirming. So I go to the kitchen and push my fridge over to the balcony and over the railing. It nails the guy. I turn around and go to yell at my wife when I die of a heart attack."

SP "You poor man! Go have an extra day"

Well now the second soul is approaching the  Gates, so St. Peter says "My son, tell me about your last day on Earth"

Second Guy "St. Peter my last day was AWFUL! So I'm gardening on the 20th floor of my apartment building when I lose my balance and fall. Thankfully I managed to catch the railing right below my balcony.  When out of nowhere this lunatic appears and starts kicking my hands and screaming something about sleeping with his wife. I fall from the balcony, and the last thing I remember seeing is a fridge falling towards me."

SP *snickering* "Go have your day!"

A third soul is approaching the Gates so St. Peter says. "My son, tell me about your last day on Earth"

Third Guy "So I'm naked in a fridge...."
What is the Latin word for Hipster? *Pretentious Pretentious*
Three men find a genies lamp. After a horrific plane crash three men end up on a desserted island.  An Englishman, a Frenchman and a German.  While searching for shelter, they discover a genies lamp.  The Frenchman grabs it and rubs it......poof the genie appears and grants them each one wish.

The Frenchman speaks up first "I want all my people togeather, every French speaking person to be in our own beautiful island.  We can enjoy the arts, drink wine and smoke in church."  Instantly the Frenchman disappeared.

The German was very intrigued and asked for the same, "I want all my people togeather on an island, we can drink beer and eat bratwurst.  Poof he disappeared.

The genie asked the Englishman if he wanted the same. "Are all the French and Germans really isolated on their own islands."  The genie confirms they were.  " Shit then I'm good, does this place gave wifi?"
What kind of tea is sometimes hard to swallow ? Reality .
My mother keeps asking me when I am going to get married And my answer is always the same, "I'm sorry, mom, but I'm afraid you will not live until that moment. You have cancer."
What has 9 arms and sucks? Def Leppard.
Why did the blonde get into a car accident? She thought "dodge" and "ram" were instructions
Liberals declared leukemia to be racist There's too many white cells.

We were having a family dinner when my grandma started telling one of her old holocaust survival stories I said, "Stop it, grandma, this is not germane right now."
What was one of Gregory Mendel's conclusions Death.
What do you call a con artist with a degree in psycology? Sigmund Fraud.
"Girl, are you a popular work of fiction?" "Because I want to self-insert myself into you."
My girlfriend is quite selfish in the bedroom I gave her an orgasm last night and she spat it back in my face
They had to stop the leprosy hockey game Due to a face-off in the corner. 

Thank you, thank you, I'll be here all week, don't forget to tip your waitress
An Israeli doctor says... An Israeli doctor says: "In Israel, medicine is so advanced that we cut off a man's liver put them on another man, and in 6 weeks, he is looking for work."

The German doctor says: "That's nothing,
in Germany we take part of a brain, put it in another man, and in 4 weeks he is looking for work."

The Russian doctor says: "Gentlemen, we take half a heart from a man, put it in another's chest, and in 2 weeks he is looking for work."

The American   doctor laughs: "You all are behind us. Two days ago, we took a man with no brains, no heart, and no liver and made him President.

Now, the whole country is looking for work!"
My waifu is the square root of -100 She's a perfect 10, but imaginary.
I just turned on nickelodeon and saw bob the builder building a wall... ... to keep Dora from exploring. 
"What line should we wait in for food?" "Pho queue"
I don't date coworkers... Not for lack of trying...it just hasn't worked out so far.
Little Carol... Little Carol came into the kitchen where her mother was making dinner. Her birthday was coming up and she thought this was a good time to tell her mother what she wanted. "Mom, I want a bike for my birthday."
Now, Little Carol was a bit of a troublemaker. She had gotten into trouble at school and at home. Carol's mother asked her if she thought she deserved to get a bike for her birthday. Little Carol, of course, thought she did. Carol's mother, been a Christian woman, wanted her to reflect on her behavior over the last year, and write a letter to God and tell him why she deserved a bike for her birthday. Little Carol stomped up the steps to her room and sat down to write God a letter.

Letter 1:

Dear God, 

I have been a very good girl this year and I would like a bike for my birthday. I want a red one.

Your friend, Carol


Carol knew this wasn't true. She had not been a very good girl this year, so she tore up the letter and started over.


Letter 2: 

Dear God, 

This is your friend Carol. I have been a pretty good girl this year, and I would like a red bike for my birthday.

Thank You, Carol


Carol knew this wasn't true either. So she tore up the letter and started again.


Letter 3:

Dear God, 

I know I haven't been a good girl this year. I am very sorry. I will be a good girl if you just send me a red bike for my birthday.

Thank you, Carol


Carol knew, even if it was true, this letter was not going to get her a bike. By now, she was very upset. She went downstairs and told her mother she wanted to go to church. Carol's mother thought her plan had worked because Carol looked very sad.
"Just be home in time for dinner," her mother said... Carol walked down the street to the church and up to the altar. She looked around to see if anyone was there. She picked up a statue of the Virgin Mary, slipped it under her jacket and ran out of the church, down the street, into her house, and up to her room. She shut the door and sat down and wrote her letter to God...

Letter 4:


I GOT YOUR MAMA.
IF YOU WANT TO SEE HER AGAIN, SEND THE BIKE. 

Signed, YOU KNOW WHO
There's a strange movie called "Being Vladimir Putin." It's about a Russian dictator who discovers a secret door in the Kremlin that magically leads up the asshole of Donald Trump.
Why didn't the Tibetan girl trust her boyfriend? Himalayan 
What's the last thing you want to hear when you're blowing Willie Nelson? "So...I'm not actually Willie Nelson."
There are 10 types of people Those who recycle binary jokes, and those who recycle other jokes.
Abortion jokes are really shallow... They always fail to deliver.
A dyslexic person... Walks into a bra 
"How did Trump become president?!?!" Asks the country getting its weather forecast from a groundhog. 
A penguin goes to the mechanic A penguin's car breaks down and he takes the car to the mechanic. The mechanic tells him to come back in an hour. The penguin goes wandering around town and he stumbles upon an ice cream store. He buys some ice cream and goes back to the mechanic. 

The mechanic says "It looks like you blew a seal." 

The penguin responds "No, no, its just ice cream." 
Last week was my 40th birthday. I really didn't feel like waking up that morning. I managed to pull myself together and go downstairs for breakfast, hoping my wife would be pleasant and say, "Happy Birthday!", and possibly have a small present for me. As it turned out, she barely said good morning, let alone "Happy Birthday." I thought... Well, that's marriage for you, but the kids... They will remember. 

My kids came trampling down the stairs to breakfast, ate their breakfast, and didn't say a word to me. So when I made it out of the house and started for work, I felt pretty dumpy and despondent. 

As I walked into my office, my secretary Joanne said, "Good Morning Boss, and by the way Happy Birthday!" It felt a bit better knowing that at least someone remembered. I worked in a zombie like fashion until about one o'clock, when Joanne knocked on my door and said, "You know, it's such a beautiful day outside, and it's your Birthday, why don't we go out for lunch, just you and me." I said, "Thanks, Joanne, that's the best thing I've heard all day. Let's go!" 

We went to lunch but not where we'd normally go. Instead she took me to a quiet bistro with a private table. We had a couple of mixed drinks and I enjoyed the meal tremendously. On the way back to the office, Joanne said, "You know, It's such a beautiful day... We don't have to go right back to the office, do we?" I replied with "I suppose not. What do you have in mind?" She said, "Let's go to my apartment, it's just around the corner." 

After arriving at her apartment, Joanne turned to me and said, "Boss if you don't mind, I'm goinna to step into the bedroom for just a moment. I'll be right back." "Ok." I nervously replied. She went into the bedroom and, after a couple of minutes, she came out carrying a huge birthday cake... 

Followed by my wife, my kids, and dozens of my friends, and co-workers, all singing "Happy Birthday". 

And I just sat there... 

On the couch... 

In my birthday suit.
A Jewish man Sent his son on a trip to Israel When his son returned, it was brought up that, while on the trip, he had converted to Christianity. Distraught, the Jewish man went to a close friend of his and explained the situation. 

The other man replied, "Well that's strange, I too sent my son to Israel a Jew, and he too came back a Christian!" The two men were saddened, yes, but also intrigued. They went to their Rabbi with the concerns, again explaining the situation.

As they were explaining what had happened, the Rabbi had a pained look on his face, and when they were done he responded, "Well that's strange, my son went on the same trip as a Jew, and he too came back a Converted Christian!"

The three men devised a plan to figure out what was going on. They got on a plane and flew to Israel, determined to find out what was converting their sons! They found nothing, and went to the West Wall to pray about it. They screamed to the sky, "GOD, WE HAVE SENT OUR SONS TO ISRAEL AS JEWS, AND THEY CAME BACK CHRISTIAN, WHY HAVE YOU DONE THIS TO US?!"

There was a moment of complete silence, followed by a booming voice from the sky...

"Well that's strange..."
Iran bans Americans from traveling there. Won't beheading there anymore
Elephants weigh more than rats. weigh more.
I had bad breath this morning So I exSpeaminted with Wrigleys gum.
If Trump says, "Fuck You" to you, don't be angry... because rather being angry, you need to be worried. He is a man of his words, so run and hide if you can. 
What is the most literary vegetable? A punion
A pregnant woman and husband attend a pregnancy class together. The doctor is explaining to the class how to make pregnancy and delivery easier on the couples. He goes on to explain how it's very beneficial to walk during the pregnancy, as it is good for exercise and such. The doctor explains to the husbands they should encourage it by accompanying them on their walks. A slow pace and frequent stops is recommended, as well as walking on grass or other softer surfaces. 

After the doctor finishes he asks for questions and one husband raises his hand. The husband says "would it be ok for her to carry the clubs too?" 
I went up to this really cute homeless girl and asked if I could take her home She looked ecstatic until I picked up her box and started walking away
Why is the nose in the middle of the face? Its the scenter.
Why are black people so good at basketball? because it's all about running, shooting, and stealing.
Why are Samurai so easy to kill? There are only chinks in the armor
What is the Mexicans favourite game? Borderlands
America in the 1930s be like: I have crippling depression.
A partially deaf guy and his wife are having a baby. The wife has a fairly hard labor, there were a few complications but all was well and now have a beautiful baby girl. 

The husband turns to the doctor and asks, "So doc, when can we..uhh..be intimate again?"

The doctor smiles and tells the man, "About 6 to 8 weeks."

The man loses his shit and yells, "68 WEEKS!"



**Disclaimer:** This is a totally true story that happened to my loving mother and father who tell this story every chance they get. 
How do you call a Fay in black robes? It is a Faygoth
What is E.T. short for? He has really small legs 
Stop with all the Chuck Norris jokes It's not like he's god, he's just an actor who played a character. If he is indeed a god, I dare him to appear in my house and do his worsdhrgusfjdfhcyzyhuxujxxuxuxz448"7"7$7**dufnfjufkfickggbnffu37jkvocififfiesduducififiiewskofuayaudofoifdud2645udux3kfkfidiiif
I'm so horny. I need to go home and pound my wife ...in the head with a skillet, so she can't hear me and the girl I brought home having sex.
How much does high speed internet cost in Australia? NINE-HUNDRED DOLLARYDOOS
Why do marxists only drink herbal tea? Because proper tea is theft.  
What do you call 100 rabbits walking backwards? A receding hare line
"Hi there, I'm here for Club Paradox" Actually this is Oxymoron Club. "Ok, same difference." looks at group Oh, this guy is good.

Why did the black guy have cocaine sprinkled on him? The cops were out of bullets.

I was changing the 15 fuses at the Buzzfeed HQ building Number 5 shocked me.
So the British government have just produced a white paper detailing their plan of leaving the EU Well, they weren't about to use black or brown paper now were they?
What do you call a Cuban that immagrated to Spain? Spain-ish
Me and my dad have been butting heads... ... since before I was born
Have you heard about the vampire turned poet? He went from _bat_ ... to __verse__!
What do you call a female magician? An assistant.
I saw a black man... I saw a black man in Nikes running down the street carrying a 55" TV and I thought to myself, "Is that mine?"

Then I remembered that mine wears Reebok.
My penis was in the Guinness book of world records... Until the librarian screamed at me to take it out.
Muslims in America [removed]
What do you call a group of French rabbits running backwards? A retreating hare line.
Why is the space between a woman's breasts and her hips called a waist? 18+ Why is the space between a woman's breasts and her hips called a waist?
Because you could easily fit another pair of tits in there.

Why are feminists so good at math? Theyre skilled at triggernometry.
Police arrested two kids yesterday One was drinking battery acid, the other was eating fireworks. They charged one and let the other one off.
I'm like a bull in a China Shop... If "China Shop" is what you call your mom.  [OC]
What is the worst part about time travelling jokes? Punchline? Never heard of him. 
When someone asks why you don't have muscles "My muscles are just like John Cena. You can't see me"
Didn't know groundhogs are part Didn't know groundhogs are part of the Stark family . 
They always think Winter is coming.  
My dog has been acting up lately... I think it's fed up with it's gender.
How many Presidents does it take to screw in a lightbulb? None. He's too busy screwing his daughter in the oval office.

It's hard to explain puns to kleptomaniacs... Because they always take things literally.
So I left my Adderall in my Ford Fiesta last night... Now it's a Ford Focus. 
The NATO battleplan began to fall apart just as the battle started. All the nations troops were in the planned positions. However what no one expected was the Spanish in-position.
Pornhub now makes you view an ad before you can watch your video. Is this what the world is coming to?
Why did the guitar player get arrested? For fingering a minor.
Want to hear a joke? So did Helen Keller.
Which came first, the chicken or the egg? The cock.
Stringed Bikini's Stringed Bikini's are making our beaches see-shores. 
I asked Yoda for his opinion of the play Les Miserables "Lame is."
What do you call a baby horse, wrapped in aluminum, who was stopped from committing his dastardly plan? A Foiled Foil Foal
What's the biggest similarity between feminists and linebackers? Everything that happens to them is offensive.
A drunk guy walks into a bus and sits next to a very ugly lady. The drunk guy stares at her and says:

-Shit, you are the ugliest woman I've ever seen in my life.


The lady looks back at him and says:

What about you? You are wasted and you look disgusting!

The drunk guy replies:

-That's true, but i'll be fine tomorrow.
Jesus walks into a restaurant with his Apostles... and says to the host, "Table for 26 please".  The host, confused said, "but Jesus, it's just you and your 12 Apostles, that only makes 13".  To this Jesus replied, "Yeah, but we're only going to sit on one side of the table."
I became a proud dad today! My son is actually 4 but he was a boring little cunt for the first 3 years.
What is the difference between a sadist and a masochist? One practices the golden rule.
TIL short people experience an wage gap comparable to that of blacks They should really rise up against it
What's the difference between 3 dicks and a joke? Your mum can't take a joke.
How can you tell if you're best friend is gay? If his dick tastes like shit.
A step-by-step guide of how to tell if your girlfriend is cold: 1) She won't stop fucking telling you. 
Last night, my wife asked me to make her "feel like a woman" I took off my shirt, and told her to iron it.
Why couldn't the man remember where he left his glasses? It was all a blur.
I'm not anti Semitic I'm anti semantic I can't stand a wordy Jew 
What's the difference between a good secretary and a great secretary? A good one says, "*Good morning.*"

A great one says, "*It's morning.*"
There are 10 types of people in the world... .. those who understand binary, and those who get laid.
My buddy was watching a video of an NFL player involved in domestic violence. I asked, "What position did he play?" He answered..... Kicker
Why do Frenchmen have a hard time counting to four? Because there's a tree in the way.
Melania and Ivanka were having a conversation in the rose garden. Melania asked Ivanka if she could go into the house and grab something her. 
"I'm going to need a few secret service agents for that" replied Ivanka. 
Melania nods her approval. 
After 15 minutes, Ivanka and the agents are struggling out the door trying to balance this huge beautiful light fixture. 
Melania is now very irritated and angrily yells out "I can't take this anymore! Where's my husband!? What do I need a chandelier for!? I asked you to bring out that broken charlatan!"
I swear, the other day I bought a packet of peanuts, I swear, the other day I bought a packet of peanuts, and on the packet it said ''may contain nuts.'' Well, YES! That's what I bought the buggers for! You'd be annoyed if you opened it and a socket set fell out!'
What's the toughest commandment for IV drug users to follow? Don't take God's name in vein.
What do Germans call a broken toilet? A scheizer geyzer.
11 a.m. is always such a hard time for me I should probably stop taking Viagara with breakfast.
The story of John, the betting salior. John was a young military salior with an unusual ability. He could make very off-the-wall predictions, and he had a knack for making money off them.

One day, a shipmate finds him making a small X on the deck with tape, and asks what he's doing. John stands up. "I'll bet you fifty bucks, in exactly an hour a seagull will fly over, and shit exactly on this spot." The other man laughs, says "You're on!", and they shake on it.

They both come back to the deck close to an hour later. After a few minutes, sure enough, they hear the calls of a gull, followed by a faint splat. The salior looks down in disbelief at the pile of bird shit on the center of the tape. He pays up.

A couple of days pass. It's a beautiful day, not a cloud in the sky. Back on the deck, another salior finds John walking around in his rain coat, and asks why he's wearing such odd attire on such a pretty day. "I'll bet you 100 dollars that you're gonna regret not wearing yours too in just a minute." The second man looks at him, and takes the bet. He begins to walk away, but before he can take a dozen steps, a single dark cloud forms in the sky and begins to soak the entire ship. 

These strange bets continue, and before long, news reaches the captain of the ship. He wants this madman off his boat. He calls some friends in high places, and gets John transfered to another vessel. A few days later, he receives a phone call from the commander of the destroyer John was placed on.

"You know," says the commander, "I don't see why you wanted him gone so bad. I've already won five thousand from him. He's not as good as you said."

"What? How'd you pull that off?"

The commander laughs. "The idiot bet me that I had hemorrhoids! I've never had them in my life, easy money! It was a little awkward proving it, but worth it."

"How'd you prove it?"

"Simple. I pulled down my pants, and showed him my asshole. He still didn't believe me, so he grabbed a broom and poked at me, and finally was convinced. Easiest five grand I've ever made."

There was a silence, and the captain finally said, "Throw that son of a bitch overboard right now."

"What? Why?" asked the commander.

"Because on his last day before the transfer, he bet me twenty thousand that he'd willingly have a broomstick up your ass by the end of the first week."
What's a Jewish person's favourite martial arts? Judo
Ole the Norwegian Insurance Salesman Ole, the smoothest Norske in the Minnesota National Guard and a natural born salesman, got called up to active duty. Ole's first assignment was in a military induction center. Because he was a good talker, they assigned him the duty of advising new recruits about government benefits, especially the GI life insurance, to which they were entitled. The officer in charge soon noticed that Ole was getting a 99% sign-up rate for the more expensive supplemental form of GI insurance.
 
This was remarkable, because it cost these low-income recruits $30 per month for the higher coverage, compared to what the government was already providing at no charge. The officer decided he'd sit in the back of the room at the next briefing and observe Ole's sales pitch.
 
Ole stood up before the latest group of inductees and said…"If you haf da normal GI insurans an' yoo go to Afghanistan an' get yourself killed, da governmen' pays yer beneficiary $20,000. If yoo take out da supplemental insurans, vich cost you only t'irty dollars a mont, den da governmen' got ta pay yer beneficiary $200,000!  Now, Ole concluded,"Vich bunch you tink dey gonna send ta Afghanistan first?”
What group of limbed people is the worst at karate The deaf 
A Blonde's Brain Q: What do you call a blonde with two brain cells?

A: Pregnant. 

Little Tommy asks his mom if he can have some animal crackers Little Tommy asks his mom if he can have some animal crackers. His mom gives him a box of crackers and tells him he can have a few. His mom leaves and comes back in a few minutes finding all of the crackers on the floor with Tommy looking through them. His mother asks "What are you doing Tommy?"

Tommy replies "It said don't eat if the seal was already broken. But I can't find a seal!"
What do you get if you combine an organ and jam? A hearty breakfast
Earbuds so today one of my friend was wearing ear buds and im like: YOU MAY HAVE EAR BUDS, BUT I GOT MY BUDS EAR! and i grabbed my friends ear.
A man wearing a turban walks into a doctor's office... and the doctor says "What's wrong with you?", to which the man replies "Doctor, can't you see I'm Sikh?"
If you don't want your grades to sink like the titanic..... You should try to keep them above C level 
I used my Google Rewards on a video of Caitlyn Jenner It was worth the transaction
A man goes to the doctor's office with a black eye... The doctor asks, "How did this happen?" The man says, "Well doctor, you're not going to believe this, but this happened at church! The pastor asked us all to stand, and when we did I noticed the woman in front of me had a wedgie. So naturally, I reached forward and pulled her dress out for her, but then she turned around and punched me in the eye! Unbelievable..."

The doctor then prescribed some painkillers and sent the man on his way. 

One week later, the man returns to the doctor with another black eye. "What happened this time?!" the doctor exclaims. 

"Well doctor, you're not going to believe me, but this happened at church again! The pastor asked us all to stand, and wouldn't you know, the same woman in front of me had another wedgie! The man next to me reached forward and pulled her dress out for her, but I knew she didn't like that, so I reached up and tucked it back in!"
I know an NP-Complete joke but once you've heard one you've heard them all
What is America's favorite drink? Liber-Tea
Time to train for my favourite winter sport. Extreme Hibernation....
Did you guys hear about the cow that jumped over the barbed wire fence? It was an "udder" disaster!
Some say laughter is the best medicine. I prefer sedatives.
I invented a sandal for people with one leg. It was a flop.
2020 Olympic High Jump Results: Gold- Mexico
Silver- Mexico
Bronze- Mexico
What do you call a truthful Native American? Pocahonest.
Guess what Chicken butt
Whats the difference between a golf ball and a G-spot? Guys will actually look for the golf ball.
The only interview you can never fuck up is the exit interview.

No HR is going to say "Sorry. You're rejected. You'll have to continue working with us till your last breath."
What does the sign on an out of business brothel say? Beat it. We're closed.
Had the strangest sexual encounter of my life last night "Had the strangest sexual encounter of my life last night," Bill said to Frank. "A blind call girl" 

"Really?" said Frank.

"Yeah. You gotta hand it to her."

Giant Pandas are the least racist animal... They're Black, White and Asian!
When is it time for bed at Michael Jackson's house? When the big hand touches the little hand. Woooo Shamone!!
Jesus and Moses go fishing... While in line at the canoe rental place Moses looks over at Jesus and asked him, "Cant you walk on water? Why do we need a canoe?"

Jesus remembers his ability and tries to walk across the river but falls knee deep in the water.

Moses then says, "Maybe you need to get a running head start. Try over there on the dock."

Jesus gets a running head start but ends up falling into the river once again. He is perplexed as to why this is not working.

Moses then says, "Wait Jesus, did you have holes in your feet last time you did this?"
What is the difference between Donald Trump and Kanye West? 4 years.
Alt-Right does nothing for our Word Ctrl-Right, though, moves us to a whole new Word.

Obligatory I'm here all day.
During the Second World War, a Briton,and a Pole were captured by the Germans During the Second World War, a Briton,and a Pole were captured by the Germans. Each man was sentenced to stand
before a firing squad.The Briton was the first to be put again
the wall. Standing back, the German officer 
said, "Ready, aim-

At which point the Briton interrupted by shouting "Earthquake!"

The firing squad ran for cover, and the Briton
escaped

Regrouping, the Germans put the Frenchman against the wall. Once again the oberst said,Ready, aim

"Flood!" Taking a leaf from the Briton's book, the Frenchman yelled.

Once again the Germans panicked, and the prisoner escaped

Finally the Polish resistance fighter faced the guns, ready to repeat the ploy of his pre-decessors. The oberst said, "Ready, aim-

"Fire!" hollered the Pole.

What cereal does President Trump stockpile at the White House? Cheerios...Made for little hands!
What do you call a pig with no legs? Ground Hog! Happy Groundhog's Day!
My wife told me if I kept making puns about my dark yellow glove then she'd leave me. I told her I could see where she was coming from, even I found it annoying I mustard mitt.
So a man and a wife were walking.... The wife sees a dog licking itself and whispers to her husband 
"I wish I could get down like that."
The husband replies "I suggest you ask if you can pet em first"
What is a physicist's preferred city of residence? Velo City.
What kind of faucet is only Cold? Farrah
Q: What's the difference between hemophilia and virginity?  None. One prick, and it's all over.
What's the most common blood type in Taiwan? Taipei 
Pregnant - Beyonce Pregnant with twins - Beytwice
My baby finally spoke her first words She said "Google Lady Gaga"
A blonde walks into a bank A blonde walks into a bank in New York City and asks for the loan officer. She says she's going to Europe on business for two weeks and needs to borrow $5,000. The bank officer says the bank will need some kind of security for the loan, so the blonde hands over the keys to a new Rolls Royce. The car is parked on the street in front of the bank; she has the title, and everything checks out. The bank agrees to accept the car as collateral for the loan. The bank's president and its officers all enjoy a good laugh at the blonde for using a $250,000 Rolls as collateral against a $5,000 loan. An employee of the bank then drives the Rolls into the bank's underground garage and parks it there. Two weeks later, the blonde returns and repays the $5,000 and the interest, which comes to $15.41. The loan officer says, "Miss, we are very happy to have had your business, and this transaction has worked out very nicely; but we are a little puzzled. We checked you out and found that you are a multimillionaire. What puzzles us is - why would you bother to borrow $5,000?" The blond replies....."Where else in New York City can I park my car for two weeks for only $15.41 and expect it to be there when I return?"
A little boy kills a butterfly A little boy kills a butterfly. 
Dad says, "No butter for one week!"

The little boy kills a honeybee.
Dad says, "No honey for one week!"

Mom kills a cockroach.

The little boy turns to his dad and says, "Are you gonna tell her or should i do it?
Time flies like an arrow fruit flies like a banana
Why are magicians lousy reporters? They always ask trick questions.
This is a chemistry joke repost... All the original ones Argon.
What's the best pattern for a banker's suit? Checks!
Why did the Amish girl keep getting pregnant? Too many mennonite.
The Groundhog just saw a Muslim outside Gobblers Knob. Predicting six more months of travel ban 
Smart Diagnosis Machine One day, in line at the company cafeteria, Jack says to Mike behind him, "My elbow hurts like hell. I guess I better see a doctor." 

"Listen, you don't have to spend that kind of money," Mike replies. "There's a diagnostic computer at the drugstore at the corner. Just give it a urine sample and the computer'll tell you what's wrong and what to do about it. It takes ten seconds and costs ten dollars...a hell of a lot cheaper than a doctor." 

So Jack deposits a urine sample in a small jar and takes it to the drugstore. He deposits ten dollars, and the computer lights up and asks for the urine sample. He pours the sample into the slot and waits. 

Ten seconds later, the computer ejects a printout: You have tennis elbow. Soak your arm in warm water and avoid heavy activity. It will improve in two weeks. 

That evening while thinking how amazing this new technology was, Jack began wondering if the computer could be fooled. He mixed some tap water, a stool sample from his dog, urine samples from his wife and daughter, and masturbated into the mixture for good measure. 

Jack hurries back to the drugstore, eager to check the results. He deposits ten dollars, pours in his concoction, and awaits the results. 

The computer prints the following:
 
1. Your tap water is too hard. Get a water softener. 
2. Your dog has ringworm. Bathe him with anti-fungal shampoo. 
3. Your daughter has a cocaine habit. Get her into rehab. 
4. Your wife is pregnant...twin girls. They aren't yours. Get a lawyer. 
5. If you don't stop playing with yourself, your elbow will never get better.

Whats lopsided and provocative? A stripper who had a stroke
Someone asked me "What's the longest time you ever went without sex? " 16 years. Once.  When I was young. 
Why did the piece of chalk cross the road? There was treasure buried underneath.
How many Muslims were banned? How many Muslims were banned?

Allah them.
Onions. I remember crying when my dad chopped onions.

Onions was a good dog. I miss him.
Want to hear a joke about Sodium? Na

Want to hear a joke about Sodium Hypobromite?

NaBrO
Eyes Specialist Doctor: Hello, did you come to see me with an eye problem?

Patient: Wow, yes, how can you tell?

Doctor: Because you came in through the window instead of the door.



Little Johnny was sitting in class one day. On this particular day, the teacher wanted to ask her class which part of the body went to heaven first.

One little girl raised her hand and said, "I think your mind goes to heaven first because you have to have a mind in order to believe in God."

The teacher praises the little girl as a little boy raises his hand. He says, "I think your heart goes to heaven first because God is all about love."

"Very good," said the teacher. The teacher looked up and saw Little Johnny's hand up. "Oh no," she thought, "I'm not gonna like this. "Little Johnny, which part of the body do you think goes to heaven first?"

Little Johnny thinks for a minute and says, "Your feet." The teacher asked him why he thought your feet go to heaven first.

He replied, "Well, I was walking past my parents' bedroom last night and my mom had her feet up in the air and she said, 'Oh God, I'm coming!', but fortunately Dad was on top of her holding her down.
How do say farewell to a cat? You ask him to have a mice day.
Why was the math book sad? It had lots of problems. 

[My little brother told me this earlier.]
One day a man was waking along the beach One day a man was waking along the beach when he tripped over a lamp. He turned around and kicked the lamp out of anger. A few seconds later, a genie popped out of the lamp.

Reluctantly, the genie said, "Even though you kicked me, I still have to give you three wishes. However, because of what you did, I will also give twice what you wish for to the person you hate the most: your boss."

So the man agreed and made his first wish. "I want lots of money", he said. Instantly 22 million dollars appeared in the man's bank account and 44 million appeared in his boss' account.

For his second wish, the man wished for a couple of sports cars. Instantly a Lambergini, Ferrari and Porsche appeared. At the same time two of each car appeared outside of his boss' house.

Finally the genie said, "This is your last wish, you should choose carefully," and to this the man replied, "I've always wanted to donate a kidney..."

Trump is alot like a Dragon Ball Z villain He has yet to sign his final form! Bahahaahaaa I love coffee
A Muslim walks into a gay bar And says "shots for everyone!" 
Groundhog sees Trumps shadow. . . Four more years of Nuclear Winter
100m Dash A girl says to her friend "The last time I had sex was like the 100 meter dash"

Her friend says "What, over in 6 seconds?"

"No, with 8 black men and a gun."
Date night I was on a date with a girl last night and the conversation started to get steamy. She was holding my hand and I said; "just by using these fingers I could make you scream."
Seductively she leant forward and purred "well go on then, show me..."
So I poked her in the eye!
What did the company that makes wooden counters say to their client? "We stand behind our product"
Trump cured me... of impostor syndrome.
I just went to my first biweekly Screw Trump party I'm gonna try his gays only one next week.
Two men are out hunting when one of them suddenly drops dead  Two men are out hunting when one of them suddenly drops dead. He calls 911 immediately. The operator says "Can I help you sir?"

The man replies "I think my friend is dead! Get an ambulance! What should I do?"

The operator replies "Okay, calm down sir. First we have to make sure he is dead."

There is silence, then a gun shot, then the man comes back on "Okay, what now?"
Why did the bean get released from the mental asylum? It wasn't a nut.
Son: "Mom, Dad, I am gay...." Mom: Stares at Dad

Dad: Clenches fist

Mom: "Don't!"

Dad: Sweats Profusely

Mom: ...

Dad: "HI GAY, I'M DAD"

A guy goes to the public shower and sees an old man with a huge dick... His dick is literally hanging to his knees, so naturally the guy asks the old man: 

"how did you achieve that huge of a dick?"

"Oh," says the old man, "every morning i put some weights on it so it streches out, about 500 grams right on the tip".

Next morning the guy remembers the old mans advice and puts 500 gram weight on his dick. Day goes past, and what do you know - his dick is streched to his knees, but the man wants more. Next day he puts a 800gram weight on his cock - and in the evening his dick is stretched to his ankles - but once again, he wants more. The day after he goes and puts 1kg of weight on his dick - after work he checks the length, and its now much longer then the old mans at the shower, basically dragging at the floor.

So then he decides that its time to test it out and surprise his wife with his size - but, to his and hers dismay, he can't get it up, no matter how hard he tries.

The next day the guy comes to the shower to ask the old man how does he manages to use it. He comes to the guy and says:
"I did what you suggested, and it worked - not only my dick was hanging at my knees like yours, but i got it even bigger - right to the floor, but now it doesn't go up when i need it to, how the fuck do you manage to use it?"

"I don't know", says the old man, "I use it to wipe my ass, so i guess with your length you can brush your teeth with it."
What did one tampon say to the other tampon? Nothing, they're stuck up bitches. 
80,000 blondes meet at a football stadium for a "Blonds Are Not Stupid" convention The leader says, "We are all here today to prove to the world that blondes are not stupid. Can I have a volunteer?"
A blonde gingerly works her way through the crowd and steps up to the stage.

The leader asks her, "What is 15 plus 15?"

After 15 or 20 seconds she says, "Eighteen!"

Obviously everyone is a little disappointed. Then 80,000 blondes start cheering, "Give her another chance! Give her another chance!"

The leader says, "Well since we've gone to the trouble of getting 80,000 of you in one place and we have the world- wide press and global broadcast media here, gee, uh, I guess we can give her another chance."
So he asks, "What is 5 plus 5?"

After nearly 30 seconds she eventually says, "Ninety?"

The leader is quite perplexed, looks down and just lets out a dejected sigh -- everyone is disheartened - the blonde starts crying and the 80,000 girls begin to yell and wave their hands shouting, "GIVE HER ANOTHER CHANCE! GIVE HER ANOTHER CHANCE!"

The leader, unsure whether or not he is doing more harm than damage, eventually says, "Ok! Ok! Just one more chance -- What is 2 plus 2?"

The girl closes her eyes, and after a whole minute eventually says, "Four?"

Throughout the stadium pandemonium breaks out as all 80,000 girls jump to their feet, wave their arms, stomp their feet and scream... "Give her another chance! Give her another chance!"
I asked my agent what time I should arrive to be paid for the Elvis impersonation gig. He said it's 1 for the money.
Which monkey can fly? A hot air baboon!
Why is Donald Trump's favorite cuisine Canadian? Because he loves to have a mouthful of Poutine. 
Why couldn't the dogs understand each other. Because they didn't have any common scents. Ha ha ha... I'll see myself out.
What did 0 say to 8? Nice belt!
What type of penis do Chinese mice have? Mousey dongs
Breaking News: Donald Trump elected 45th President of the United States! I know this already came out, but I am just now believing it.  
I told the judge "I discovered my wife in bed with Danny!" He said "No you didn't!  Danny already knew she was there."  
Having a foot long penis would be a real pain in the ass But not for me.
While walking through the mall I spotted the Islamic Book Store and I went in. The clerk asked me, "can I help you?"  I said, "yes, can you tell me where I can find Donald Trump's book on refugees?"  He turned beet red and said, "eat shit, get the fuck out and stay out."  I said, "yes, that's the one, now where is it located?"
My dentist reminded me of my wife's sensitive gag reflex My dentist reminded me of my wife's sensitive gag reflex. We laughed & laughed. 
Then I remembered that my wife & I have different dentists
What are your chances of getting laid by a super religious female? Nun 
Today needs to be Lobster or steak day... Because this groundhog tastes like crap!
An atheist, dyslexic insomniac spends all his nights wondering About the existence of dog.
A woman has three applicants for one job ... After exhaustive testing, interviewing and HR profiling they are still in a dead heat. 

Finally she decides to go with what Easter means to each one. Just a random question that may give her insight to offer one of them the job. 

The first applicant, scratches his head and says "that's easy, that's when the Christmas Bunny visits all the good little children around the world and brings them gifts".

A bit taken aback by the applicant's answer, she decides to press on. 

The 2nd applicant states flatly that is when Father Xmas hides eggs throughout the land to good little children to find. 

Now the hiring manager is really confused, what was supposed to be an easy way to find the better applicant has turned sideways. 

However, she decides to stay the course and ask the last applicant the same question.

The final applicant starts off "this is the day when Christians world wide celebrate the death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ..."

The manager finally has a clear answer!

The applicant continues ... Jesus was dead and buried, placed in the tomb and on the third day rose from the dead, rolled the stone back and stepped out into the sunshine, and at that point saw his shadow and said "shit, six more weeks of winter!"
What did the Aussie say when his friend ran out of TP? Bidet mate!
Did you know they make a divorcee Barbie now? She comes with all of Ken's stuff. 
Why are you up at 6am despite wanting more sleep? SIR I AM NOT A MORNING PERSON.
Sir Mix-A-Lot runs in 2020. He'll grab her by the tushy.
I've been secretly tossing pears at my neighbor for a couple weeks now I can hear him talking to his wife about government drones trying to drive him crazy, but he's just pear annoyed.
A cat can read the hands of a clock to know when it's nap time. It's nap time when the hours-hand is shorter than the minutes-hand.
What is the name of a motorist fan in the Netherlands? Bus van Truck
Thank god I wasn't born in China... I don't even speak Chinese!
Psychology lecture A psychology professor starts his lecture by telling the students: "Today we'll learn about the three stages of human emotion: surprise, irritation, and rage." With that, he takes his phone out of his pocket, puts it on speaker, and dials a random number.

"Hello, may I please speak to Dave?" says the professor when the other person answers.

"No, I'm sorry, you have the wrong number" says the person on the other end.

"You see that students, that's surprise. Now allow me to show you what irritation sounds like."

He picks up the phone again, and dials the same number. When it answers, the professor asks.

"Hi, can Dave come to the phone?"

"I told you you have the wrong number"

"That's irritation, my friends" says the professor. "Now, let's look at what rage looks like"

He picks up the phone and dials the number again. When it answers he asks.

"Is Dave available?"

"LISTEN, YOU FUCKING DIPSHIT. IF YOU CALL THIS NUMBER AGAIN, I'LL COME OVER, BREAK THAT PHONE IN HALF AND SHOVE IT UP YOUR ASS. AND IF IT DOESN'T FIT, I'LL PUSH IT IN WITH MY COCK!!!!!!"

"And that's rage."

"Professor, you forgot the fourth stage," says a young man in the front rows.

"And what might that be?" asks the professor.

"It's called the stage of total confusion. Allow me to demonstrate"
He comes up to the podium, takes the professor's phone and dials the same number.

"Hello, this is Dave, has somebody asked for me today?"
The groundhog saw his shadow. Four more years of suck.
Mercury asked the Sun what he was. The Sun said: I'm a motherfucking star boy.
Told my friend she couldn't take critism She told me to go to hell. 
What did the warring religious sects say to each other after they made peace? "Good Shiite."

"See you Sunni."
John and Nancy were married for 40 years and decided they wanted to renew their vows and planned a second wedding... 

They were discussing the details with their friends. 

Nancy wasn't going to wear a traditional bridal gown and she started describing the dress she was planning to wear.

One of her friends asked what color shoes she had to go with the dress. 

Nancy replied, "Silver." 

At that point, her husband chimed in, "Yep, silver...to match her hair." 

Shooting a glaring look at John's bald spot, Nancy's friend said, "So, John, I guess you are going barefoot then."
As I was approaching my driveway, I saw a big black man running away with a TV in his hands and I wondered if it was mine. Upon entering my house, I was relieved to see that mine was at home polishing my shoes.

When my cat won for "Best Feline Butt", we expected to get a small plaque. But it wasn't. It was a huge catasstrophy 
Did you hear about the constipated mathematician? He worked it out with a #2 pencil.

(With thanks from my dad)
A Friar, a Rabbi, and a Buddhist Monk Pray for the Dictator Three representatives of three different faiths come to mourn the dictator, who was shot at range. The Christian friar exclaimed: -Ave Maria! May the worthy pass into the afterlife. The Rabbi exclaimed: -By Moses! Let there be light at the end of the tunnel. Finally, the Buddhist exclaimed: -By Buddha! Prepare for Nirvana. Let his soul be as pure as his heart. A silence followed. The friar eventually leaned over to the monk and whispered: -He was shot in the heart. Did the news not reach you in time for the prayer? whereupon the monk replied: -Dear brother, it was premeditated.
My pet snake just lays around and won't move I think he's suffering from a reptile dysfunction 
Did you hear the one about fouls in Soccer? You'll get a kick out of it. 
They call my penis the truth.... 


The truth can be a real dick sometimes 
I was stunned last night when my wife told me I was too wrapped up in myself.... 

When did I get a wife? 
Blonde joke A blonde is trying to hammer down a pin into a wall, she has the flat end to the wall and is hammering the pointy end. She gets really pissed as it clearly isn't working. Her friend comes in and asks whats wrong. "Well, this pin just work! It's not piercing this wall!" she says.
Her friend looks at her and says " You idiot, You got the wrong pin!  That pin is clearly for the wall on the oppsite side!
Just after my wife had given birth, I asked the doctor, "How soon do you think we'll be able to have sex?" He winked at me and said, "I'm off duty in ten minutes - meet me in the car park."
It's okay to laugh during sex but just don't point.
In the US, there is house theft every 7 seconds Doesn't that mean walls should be built around houses?
My boss told me to have a good day. So I went home.
My company got bought out by a Madrid based firm today. Really blind-sided everyone. Nobody expected the Spanish Acquisition.
What is a Linux user's favorite game? sudo ku

EDIT: First post with 100+ upvotes. Thanks all you people :D
One more for the road. Abu Al Abid went to USA for the first time, 
He opened a furniture shop & a lingerie shop.
In 6 months....
he made a good business.
.
He sends an email to his wife saying:
Please rush, pack up & come to USA,
I sold 100 mattresses and 5000 panties.
I made $100,000.
She replies:
It is better that you close your shop and come back fast.
With 1 mattress & with no panties
I made $300,000.. ...
An unmarried couple start a jazz band. What would they call it? Premarital sax
What do you call a constipated detective? No shit Sherlock
Yesterday an Iraqi Imam made history when he said someone in Iraq had told a lie. It was the first time a Trump supporter accepted at face value a statement form an Imam without feeling the need to reach for a gun.
What is your FAVORITE pun? Mine is, "Dogs Can't Operate a MRI Machine......but Catscan"
what do you call the god of melting ice? Thaw.
Did you hear about the constipated mathematician? It's okay, he worked it out with a pencil.
"Am I the first man you have ever loved?" he said. "Of course," she answered "Why do men always ask the same question?". 
What do you call a potato that becomes US President and silences the news, silences government agencies, silences government funded science and ends international treaties? A dic-tater.
The light at the end of the tunnel, Are the front lights of a train.
my wife accused me of being immature. I told her to get out of my fort.
I've just moved into a six bedroom house with three acres of land. Don't tell the owners. 
Once upon a time, there were three kingdoms Once upon a time, there were three kingdoms, all bordering on the same lake. For centuries, these kingdoms had fought over an island in the middle of that lake. One day, they decided to have it out, once and for all.

The first kingdom was quite rich, and sent an army of 25 knights, each with three squires. The night before the battle, the knights jousted and cavorted as their squires polished armor, cooked food, and sharpened weapons. The second kingdom was not so wealthy, and sent only 10 knights, each with 2 squires. The night before the battle, the knights cavorted and sharpened their weapons as the squires polished armor and prepared dinner. The third kingdom was very poor, and only sent one elderly knight with his sole squire. The night before the battle, the knight sharpened his weapon, while the squire, using a looped rope, slung a pot high over the fire to cook while he prepared the knight's armor.

The next day, the battle began. All the knights of the first two kingdoms had cavorted a bit too much (one should never cavort while sharpening weapons and jousting) and could not fight. The squire of the third kingdom could not rouse the elderly knight in time for combat. So, in the absence of the knights, the squires fought.
The battle raged well into the late hours, but when the dust finally settled, a solitary figure limped from the carnage. The lone squire from the third kingdom dragged himself away, beaten, bloodied, but victorious.

And it just goes to prove, the squire of the high pot and noose is equal to the sum of the squires of the other two sides.
You’re one in a million China has a population of a billion people. One billion. That means even if you’re a one in a million kind of guy, there are still a thousand others exactly like you.
Why do economists exist? So accountants have someone to laugh at.
Guinness Book of World Records Recently I took a stroll through the forest when I met three dwarves. They started bragging:
"I bet I have the worlds smallest hands" said the first dwarf, the second dwarf said "I have the world smallest feet" and the last one claimed that he had the smallest dick on the planet.
I told them that if that would be really true, they should get the certificate of the Guinness Book of World Records, to prove that they were right. So I took them to the office where the first on walks into the office and afterwards walks out proudly with his certificate which said :  WORLDS SMALLEST HANDS
The second dwarf walks in and after five minutes he walks out all proud with his certificate : WORLDS SMALLEST FEET
The third dwarf walks in and after ten minutes he walks out sobbing and all disappointed and kept mumbeling:"Who the F*ck is Adam Sandler?"

<when telling this joke to your mates, swap the name Adam Sandler with one of your friends names>
Hunting Two guys are out hunting in the woods when one of them collapses. He doesn’t appear to be breathing, his eyes are glazed over. The other man pulls out his phone with trembling fingers and calls 911. He gasps, "My friend is dead! What can I do?" 

The operator says "Please stay calm. I will help you. First of all, let's make sure he's dead." There’s a silence, then a gun shot. The guy gets back on the phone and says "OK, now what?"
What do you call a Russian guy in a Racecar? Snowspeed xD
Guy: We need to stop testing our products on animals. Boss: Why? Shampoo companies do it all the time.
Guy: Ya but we make dildos.
I used to work at a bra factory but it went bust.
A woman held a seance... ...for her dead husband who , during his life, was a waiter in an high end swanky restaurant. The room was lit up with candles and the medium went into the trance. After few minutes the table started shaking. 


"Phil? Is that you?" she asked "talk to me, Phil."


"No!" replied a ghostly voice "It's not my table!"
On the late night train.... On a late night train, I was alone in a carriage, this pretty young thing boards. I stared at her.
She snapped "what are you looking at? "
I sighed.
"6 to 8 years if someone else gets in this carriage."
What was Lynyrd Skynyrd's biggest hit? The ground.


Follow-up line: It was a Buddy Holly cover.
What do you call a Chinese woman with no legs? Dragon lips
Did you know? Type O Blood was actually meant to be Type Zero blood, due to the lack of glycoproteins in the red blood cells. It was misread and is now called Type “O” blood.


I guess you could call it a typo.
Hey Honey! "Today, I went out and a saw a woman that looked identical to you, just fatter!"

"Well, did you find her attractive?"                                                                                                                                                                              






"Shit."
Who is Donald Trump's least favourite rock band? Foreigner.
What is the advantage of living in Switzerland? Well, its flag is a big plus.
At a mental hospital A bloke is visiting his mother in a mental hopsital when in the same room he comes across a guy moving his arms around and making beeping noises.
"Excuse me", he asks him. "What on earth are you doing?"
"I'm driving my car!, says the guy excitedly. "Beep beep!"
"You fucking nutbar, you're not in a car, you're in a mental hospital!"
A voice comes from the bed opposite. "Mate, shut the fuck up will you, he's giving me twenty quid a day to wash the cunt."
Why can't you hear pterodactyl in the bathroom? Because their P is silent! 
My wife always asks me: if she dies, will I remarry? And I say don't be silly honey... I never make the same mistake twice.
What did the porcupines say when they kissed? Ouch!
What's the difference between a truckload of sand and a truckload of babies? You can't unload sand with a pitchfork

What's the SI Unit for measuring Light's Weight? Hologram.
A wife walks in on her husband, in bed with another woman. "Helen, is that you?", says the husband surprised. He turns to the woman next to him. "Then who is this?"
A little old lady goes into an adult bookstore. A little old lady, about 70 years old, walks into an adult bookstore and slowly shuffles up to the counter, her hands shaking. She stutteringly says, "Eh, eh, excuse me, b-but I'm embarrased..."
The clerk says, "Please don't be ma'am, human sexuality is a beautiful, natural thing. You have nothing to be embarrassed about."
Trembling, she asks, "All right, do- do- do you have (whispers) women's...pleasure...aides here?
"Like, vibrators and dildos? Yes, ma'am, we have a large selection of both."
"An- an- and do- do you know much about them?"
The clerks looks are her shaking form and says, "Yes, ma'am, I do. I'd be happy to answer any questions you have."
To which she replies, "Great! Do- do- do- do you know how to shut 'em off?!"


:-)


(Note: When telling this joke in person, be sure to shake your hands when you're doing the little old lady's voice! Earned me a few laughs back when I was bartending :)
My mechanic thinks i'm in denial over my brake fluid leak. But he's wrong; I can stop any time i want.
What do you call a Barbie on fire? A Barbecue!







Be gentle. First post. And I remember making this up on a long car ride when I was just 4:)
Rucksacks are some of the most trustworthy things you'll ever own I mean, they've always got your back amirite
What do you call a women who cant make a sandwich? Single
You already know the punchline. What is the worst part about time travelling jokes?
What Kind Of Jam Would You Not Like On Your Bread? A Traffic Jam
Why doesn't the sun go to college? Because it already has 28 million degrees
What's the difference between a doll and a baby? You can't paint with a doll.
Why did George W. Bush cross the road? To ask his dad how to run the presidency.
Me: So do you like guys with low self esteem? Girl: Of course, yes, I do

Me: Please don't lie to make me feel better
The Jar in the Bar So a man goes out to meet his buddies at a new bar. When he arrives, the first thing he sees is a giant glass jar in the far corner of the room, 7 feet by 6 feet, packed to the brim with $10 bills. 

He sits down and asks his buddies, "What's with the jar?" 
"No idea" responds his friend, so the man asks the bartender.
In his thick Irish accent, "Ah, ye warnt a know bout the haus game does yer? That'll be $10."

Annoyed but intrigued, the man pulls out a $10 and lays it on the bar, and the old man begins, "To win all the money in that there jar, I have a gallon jug of tequila ya hafta take all down at one go and not flinch or make a face," then he points to the back door, "I have a pit bull chained out back with an aching tooth ya gotta pull, but watch out, she's mean as a blarney so be careful, and at last, I gots a 90 year old lass upstairs, who's never had an orgasm in her life. You gotta go up there and make things right for her." 

The man stands, shakes his head as he returns the table. "I understand!" yells the bartender, "But yer $10 stays in the jar."

So the guy get into a bit of a drinking session with his buddies, but can't stop thinking about the jar. If he could suck it up, just for one night, he could change his life. 

Finally, with enough liquid courage, he stumbles up the the bar and slams down a $10 bill. "Gimme the tequila." The bartender hands him the jug and he throws it back as hard as he can, throats burning, tears rolling down his face, he finishes every drop and slams it down, without making a face. The bartender points to the door, now the man staggers through the backdoor, and the barking ensues, trash cans are crashing, there's a loud scream then silence. "Awh geez says the bartender, they fuckin' killed each other." As he shoos the crowd back he gets to the door, the man bursts thru, shirt shredded, bloodied and bruised, he shouts, "Alright, now where's the old lady with the sore tooth?!"
Why did the sailor think his wife was cheating on him? Because his boat was filled with seamen.
Why is Trump so keen to stay with the queen in the UK? He heard she has golden bathrooms and can't wait to try out the showers.  
Marriage is like smoking... we believed they are good at first.
Why don't women have dirty minds? Because they're constantly changing them...
So if Trump doesn't like conversations with Turnbull and Australians don't like conversations with Turnbull, is Turnbull... ... Malcolm in the middle?
Three women are in a bar talking about how loose they are... One fits a hot dog in. 

The next fits a cucumber in. 

The last one slides down the barstool. 
Cerebral Necrophelia Gives new meaning to the expression "I fucked her brains out"
To all these people telling America n Americans to go fuck themselves I think they already took care of that in November!
My secretary reminds me of my wife. I was unbuttoning her blouse at lunch today when she said, "remember, you have a wife." 
Winter is coming. Can I watch?
What did the feminist say before shooting up a school? Trigger warning
Did you hear about the debacle at the USDA's beauty pageant? They crowned a Miss Steak.
A radio show holds a contest for the best local talent... A gentleman walks into the studio with a mutt of a dog a couple days later and asks if he can audition. 
"Sure, whaddya got?", said the radio host.
"My dog can talk.", the man replied.
Skeptical, the host sits down and beckons the man to start.
"OK boy! What is on top of a house?!"
The dog barks, "ROOF!"
The host rolls his eyes and sits back.
"And what does sandpaper feel like?!"
The dog barks, "RUFF!"
The host stands up and shouts at the man, telling him he needs to take things seriously or get out.
"OK, OK, just give us one more and I promise it'll be worth your time." the owner pleaded.
The radio host falls back into his chair, his face in his hands as he mumbles, "Fine."
"ALLRIGHT BOY! Who is the greatest baseball player in history?"
"RUTH! RUTH!"
The radio host jumps up. Red in the face, he screams at the dog owner until he leaves.
The owner walks outside and shoots a disappointed glare at his dog. The dog hangs his head, looks back up, and says,
"Do you think I should've said Mickey Mantle?"
Three business men are working on a hotel deal in Africa. On a slow day when nothing could be done, the men come with an idea to buy an elephant. The first man, who is an avid shoe collector, shouts "It's a wonderful idea!"

The second man, who wears only tailor crafted pants, excitedly offers to pay the majority of the cost.

The third man, who only wears white suits, says he knows the guy to make it happen. So the three men bought an elephant. A few weeks go by and they became bored again. The man with the white suit buys a money to entertain him.
 
One day, the shoe collector gets an idea and tells the other two "hey guys, we should cork the elephant, watch him fill up like a balloon and have the monkey yank out the cork!"

So they cork the elephant and spend two weeks training the monkey. The day finally came to pull the cork. The three men get ready. The man with the white suit stands a safe distance back. He has an idea of what will happen and wants to be out of the way but also really wants to see. The man with the tailored pants stands further away, he wants to be sure he is clear. The man with the shoes has seen something like this before and stands way way back. 

The monkey pulls the cork. Shit goes EVERYWHERE! The man with the shoes is irate! His vintage hand crafted shoes were covered with elephant poo and ruined. He walks up to the guy with the tailored pants who is screaming and yelling about his pants made from a rare fabric were ruined and too were covered in elephant poo. They walk up to the man in the white suit who is laughing hysterically. The guy with the shoes asks "how can you be laughing? You white suit is ruined and you are covered in elephant poo from head to toe!"

The man in the white suit replied "Yea, but you should have seen the monkey trying to put the cork back in!"
How much is a pound of brains worth? What's the cost of a pound of physicists' brains?

About $10.00

What about a pound of chemists' brains?

Oh.... Around $100.00.

Okay, so, what about a pound of philosophers' brains?

$1,000,000.00.

What? Seriously? Why?

Oh, well, just think of how many philosophers you'd have to kill to get a pound of brains out of them.
Trump get's his wall. (long) Trump, A Canadian and a Mexican, end up on a deserted island.  While looking for supplies to survive Trump finds a Lantern, seeing the goldish colour of the lamp Trump rubs it.

Summoning a Genie;

The Genie announces that he will grant three wishes to all that have found his Island.

Trump wishes first; "I want a wall, the best wall, all along our borders 50 feet... no 2000 feet tall,  it is going to be the greatest wall, we should have the best wall, the biggest wall, it should be the biggest wall in history"

The Genie looks at Trump and says, Granted.

The Canadian Looks at the Mexican and says, "I want to know how high the wall is, and how strong it is" The genie says "The wall is 8000 meters tall, and strong enough to hold back an ocean."

The Mexican smiles looking at the Canadian.   "Fill it with water"
Marriage and Divorce The boy and the Girl:  
Boy: Ah, finally, I've waited so long.   
Girl: You want me to leave?   
Boy: No. I dare to not even think about it.   
Girl: Do you love me?   
Boy: Of course. Lots!   
Girl: Have you ever cheated on me?   
Boy: No! Why are you asking me?   
Girl: Will you kiss me?   
Boy: Every time I get the chance!   
Girl: Will you ever hit me?   
Boy: Are you crazy? Of course not!   
Girl: Can I trust you?   
Boy: Yes.   
Girl: Darling?  

  
Now read it bottom up.
What does somebody want most when they're stranded in the desert and their camel runs away? They want their camel bak.
So an Indian, a Chinese, and an American are in a plane The plane starts falling because it has too much weight, so the three men decide to throw out the things they need least to reduce weight.

The Indian man throws out a bowl of curry. "I have too much of this in my country." he says.

The Chinese man throws out a bowl of noodles. "I have too much of this in my country." he says.

The American man pushes the Indian and Chinese man out the plane. "I have too many of these in my country." he says.
A man is shipwrecked on an island A man is sailing off the coast of Australia when a storm hits. He ends up shipwrecked on a little island. 

There are just pastures and a few farms, so he goes up to one of the farms and asks if he can stay. A couple of grizzled old shepherds are there, and they give him lodging.

The next day the shipwrecked man is bored as hell and asks what they do for fun around here.

One of the shepherds says, "See all those sheep on the hills? We go out there and fuck 'em."

"Seriously?"

"Hey mate, don't knock it till you try it!"

The visitor realizes he must have ended up in New Zealand and sulks off to his room to get away from the filthy Kiwis.

The next day, he's so bored, he sneaks out to the pasture and starts fucking one of the ewes, whose bleats echo the hills. He's having such a good romp that he doesn't notice the two shepherds leaning against the fence. When he looks over, they burst out in laughter.

He pulls his dick out of the sheep and calls out, "hey, what's so funny? I thought you said you fuck the sheep around here!"

The shepherd gestures with his arm towards the ewe and, amidst his uproarious laughter, is barely able to sputter out, "Oi mate, not the ugly ones!"
Did you know you can tell the gender of an ant by tossing it in water?! If it sinks... girl ant! 
If it floats... buoyant!  
Why do melons always have big weddings? Because they cantaloupe!
If Canadians say "Ay" and Mexicans say "Si"... Why don't Americans say "B"?
If a woman sleeps with a bunch of guys, she's a slut.  But if a guy does the same thing, then he's gay.
Mellinials today definitely have it easier than previous generations... My grandfather had to cross the Atlantic to punch a Nazi.
Why can't you ever bang construction workers? They're excellent with man hole covers.
After many years of studying at a university, I’ve finally become a PhD 
Or Pizza Hut Deliveryman as people call it.
What's the difference between Michael Phelps and Hitler? Michael Phelps can finish a race
Why are the cars built by communists no good? 'cause they're constantly Stalin!
Nothing I do makes any sense. I'm unemployed.
How do you keep redditors in suspense? I'll tell you tomorrow.
My overdramatic girlfriend came up to me, balling her eyes out and confessed to having the most painful period she's ever had before I looked her right in the face and said "stop ovary acting"
I thought recently that I was being to hard on Trump and wanted to try to see things the way he does... So I stuck my head up my ass and I get it now.
What is the the most charitable nation? A donation. 
Did you know that my alcoholic friend only weighs two pounds? Long story short, my bud light.
I was trying to be friendly to some chick at a bar... So I offered her a tic-tac.
She gets all defensive and says" are you saying my breath stinks? Is that why I needed tic-tac?"
I'm like "whoa, calm down lady. If I wanted to give you something you need it would be mustache wax and a tshirt that says 1 cock at a time."
I want to fly But gravity is such a let down
Why do black people only have nightmares? Because the last one who had a dream got shot.
Have you heard the fast gladiator that was a tumor covered in dough? He was a Roamin' Tumor Roll.
I went to a 4-year olds birthday party once, it was kinda awkward... ...probably because I wasn't invited...
Jay Leno walks into a bar. Bartender says "Why the really long face?"
Guy puts candy bar in shirt His dad always said to keep Twix up your sleeve.
I have the work ethic of an ox - If you tie a yoke to my shoulders and whip me until I move, I'm probably going to get a lot done.
Good part about trump being president is he will never forget toupee Sorry for the bad pun. Was off the top of my head.
What do you call a magic car? A Lambor-genie!
Why do farmers like to have sex with sheep at the edge of a cliff? They push back 
Two tribal men drag two criminals into the Chief's hut... The Chief asked the first criminal, "You shall choose your punishment for your crimes! Choose!"  

"Death! Or Canyananga?"  

Criminal #1 thought: "Well, I don't want to die..."

"Canyananga!"  

The Chief responded, "Very well. Bring in... Canyananga."

An ugly, giant and beastly black man walked in, took Criminal #1 to the hut next to them and proceeded to horrendously rape him.

The Chief turned to Criminal #2 and shouted, "Choose!"

Criminal #2 quickly replied in horror, "Death! Please!"

"Fine..." the Chief told him, "But first... Canyananga!"
I got vagina in China, got some more in Singapore, got some booty in Djibouti But I got gonorrhea in Korea.
What do you call a haemophobic vampire? A starving bat
Banker's balls (nsfw) A little old lady went into the Bank of Canada one day, carrying a bag of money. She insisted that she must speak with the president of the bank to open a savings account because, "It's a lot of money!" After much hemming and hawing, the bank staff finally ushered her into the president's office.

The bank president then asked her how much she would like to deposit. She replied, "$165,000!" and dumped the cash out of her bag onto his desk. The president was of course curious as to how she came by all this cash, so he asked her, "Madam, I'm surprised you're carrying so much cash around. Where did you get this money?" The old lady replied, "I make bets." The president then asked, "Bets? What kind of bets?" The old woman said, "Well, for example, I'll bet you $25,000 that your balls are square." The president laughs, "That's a stupid bet. You can never win that kind of bet!" The old lady challenged, "So, would you like to take my bet?" The president agrees, "Sure, I'll bet $25,000 that my balls aren't square!" The little old lady then said, "Okay, but since there is a lot of money involved, may I bring my lawyer with me tomorrow at 10am as a witness?"
"Sure!" replied the confident president.

That night, the president got very nervous about the bet and spent a long time in front of a mirror checking his balls, turning from side to side, again and again. He thoroughly checked them out until he was sure that there was absolutely no way his balls were square and that he would win the bet. The next morning, at precisely 10am, the little old lady appeared with her lawyer at the president's office.

She introduced the lawyer to the president and repeated the bet "$25,000 says the president's balls are square!" The president agreed with the bet again and the old lady asked him to drop his pants so they could all see. The president complied. The little old lady peered closely at his balls and then asked if she could feel them. "Well, Okay," said the president, "$25,000 is a lot of money, so I guess you should be absolutely sure."

Just then, he noticed that the lawyer was quietly banging his head against the wall. The president asked the old lady, "What the hell's the matter with your lawyer?" She replied, "Nothing, except I bet him $100,000 that at 10am today I'd have The Bank of Canada's president's balls in my hand."
They say you should test your fire alarm once a month... ... but it's costing me a fortune in houses!
An elderly man is out playing golf with a friend... An elderly man is out playing golf with a friend. 

During his turn, right before his swing, a funeral procession drives by along the border fence.

The elderly man pauses, takes off his hat, and places it on his chest.

As the procession drives along, the elderly mans friend stands just flabbergasted.

Once the procession passes, the elderly man resumes setting up his swing.

"Now hold on a second!" The elderly mans friend shouts, "That was quite a show of respect! I have never seen anything like it!"

"Well, I had to do something."

"Why's that?" Replied the elderly mans friend.

"I was married to her for 40 years!"
Why did the console gamer cross the road? To render the building
Different movie Wife comes home and whispers to her husband "let's have sex like in the movies"

The husband quickly gets undressed strips his wife, puts her in her knees, face fucks her then bends her over and sticks it in her ass then cums all over her face. 

As the wife is shaking and wiping the cum from her face she says "yea we sure do watch different movies"



My all-time favorite joke: The Forgetful Couple An elderly couple are sitting in the living room, and the old man gets up, and says "I'm going to the store to get myself a soda, do you want anything?"

His wife says "I'd like an ice cream sundae.  Here, I'll write it down for you so you don't forget--"

"I'm not going to forget," he waves his hand at her dismissively. "Ice cream sundae."

"With cherries and chopped nuts.  You'll forget, I'm going to write it down for you."

"Woman I'm not senile! I won't forget!  Sundae with cherries and nuts."

"And whipped cream.  You're sure you won't forget all this?  You forgot the last time.  Please, I'll write it down so you won't forget."

The old man gave an annoyed sigh and left the house.  He returned and handed his wife a bag. 

"Here you go, I didn't forget."

She looked inside the bag and found a toasted onion bagel.

"Yes you did!  I told you you would forget, and you did!"  The old woman threw a fit. "You forgot the cream cheese!"
I've always preferred management over human resources I guess that's just a personnel preference
What's black and white and red all over A penguin in a blender
Why is masturbating off the side of Japanese whaling ships mandatory? it's the only way to attract sperm whales.
A husband and wife are getting their first baby scan After a few minutes of silent scanning, the couple ask the doctor if anything is wrong. 

The doctor replies:  On a positive note, your child will never struggle to find a parking space. 
Bar games. Three men were sitting at a bar. They were bored of drinking so all decided to make a game of their evening pass time. They came up with a form of beer football, each taking turns chugging a beer for 6 points, burping after for 1 point, and farting for extra 2 points. The first guy chugs his beer, burps but couldn't fart. The second guy chugs his beer, burps and let's a loud fart rip. The third guy chugs his beer, belches the loudest thinking he would get additional points, finally he get up and hunches preparing to let out a massive fart when the second guy pulls down the third guys pants, and sticks his finger up the third guys ass yelling "I blocked the extra point!" 
I once had an encounter with a Grizzly Its a long story, but just bear with me
I am a judge for peanut beauty pageants My job is pretty nuts
Dead husband A detective asks a woman, "So, your husband hanged himself?" 

Woman replies, "Yes, that is correct." 

The suspicious detective continues, "But why does he have all those bruises on his head?" 

"The old fool used an elastic rope!"
What is long and hard to a blonde? Grade five.
What do you call a barnyard revolt? A chicken coup.
What lives at the North Pole and takes Lithium? A bi-polar bear. 

[OC, circa 2005]
A man asks his wife if he can cum in her ear She said 

"No, it'll make me go deaf"

To which he replied 

"Really, I always cum in your mouth and you never shut the fuck up".
Did you hear about the fire at the circus? Yeah...it was intense. 
How can you tell if a lady is ready for sexy time??? You put your hand down the front of her pants, and if it feels like you're feeding a sugar cube to a horse, Hey buddy it's time to crank up the Lynard Skynard!!  
My friend told me of this fish... My friend told me of this amazing kind of fish, he said it was impossible to catch! He said it broke the string on his rod! I've never seen it. I've fished for days and days... Nothing. You know? I'm starting to think that it's not reel.
Two GOP senators to vote no on Betsy DeVos REPORT FOLLOWS

Republicans expressed confidence that there will be no more defections. They can’t afford any, as no Democrats are set to back DeVos.



“I expect her to be confirmed,” Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas) told our reporter who caught up with him on the street. “You can take that to the bank.”

* When asked which bank he meant he replied a terse "What?"

* When asked again which bank the reporter could take the words to, the Republican senator replied "Are you serious?"

* When asked why he was avoiding the question, and why these mysterious wordbanks weren't public knowledge, the Senator left.

After a brief apology the Senator agreed to take more questions central to the house vote.

* When asked if he felt his vote could still change in the senate approval vote, the Senator mentioned it as an unlikely possibility.

* When asked whether all unbanked words would be considered invalid going forward, and, if so, whether the worlds leading up to this point and to the end of the conversation could also be taken to the bank, the senator gave a long, uncomfortable look to the reporter lasting over 45 seconds, and then said that "yes, those words could also be taken to the bank", but that it required the usual wordbank processing fee paid to the interviewee.

* When asked the amount of the wordbank processing fee for that interview, the Senator replied "Idunno, what ya got?"

* When presented with $143 in loose cash and change collected from the news crew, the Senator said "Ya, it's exactly that," and took the money.

* When asked why the Senator was walking away again, he replied "That's all you paid for."
I bought a Lottery ticket today Sven: "Ollie I bought a Lottery ticket today."

Ollie: "It looks like it has six numbers on it. 29, 4, 42, 11, 35, 36."
 
Sven: "What are the odds?"

Ollie: "29, 11, 35."

I like my Jews just how I like my juice From concentrate.
Trump is in a paradox He needs construction workers to build the wall, but he's trying to deport all the construction workers

I thought of this on the spot that's why it's bad sorry
Knock knock joke. Nazi: Knock Knock.

Polan: Who's there?

Nazi: Nazi.

Polan: Nazi wh..

Nazi: BLITZKRIEG!!!


I thought I had heard this somewhere but after extensive reaserch I came to the conclusion i may have made this up myself. If anyone finds a source for this feel free to post it in the comments.
We've had a horrible winter this year. It was so cold, lawyers were walking around with their hand is their *own* pockets.
After years of reflection I've decided to stop selling mirrors
What's the difference between horses and women? 

Horses shoes are practical
I hate when people ask me what I'm going to be doing in 3 years Like come on guys, I don't have 2020 vision!
If the last Wolverine movie is a cross country chase... then why isn't it called Logan's Run?
You go to the bathroom Russian. You come out American. What are you while you're in the bathroom? European. 
Did you hear about the kidnapping at the elementary school? He's awake now!
NSFW My SO asked me why I always make terrible puns and dad jokes I told her, "it's just gentle ribbing, you know, for your pleasure"
Why didn't barbie ever get pregnant? Because Ken always came in another box.
What's the difference between a feminist and a suicide vest? A suicide vest gets something accomplished when triggered.
Say what you will about Donald Trump his secretaries and stuff think he is a greatest president ever Can't complain​​!
What does Porsche do? Ellen. 
How many police officers does it take to push a black man down the stairs? None. "He fell".
Why did Humpty Dumpty have a great fall? Because he had a miserable summer.
Did you hear about the roman fighter who ate his mother in law? Terrible indigestion but he was gladiator.
What do you get if you cross a black man with an octopus? A mean cotton-picking machine!
A teen is arrested for shoplifting The police call his father who immediately arrives at the police station where he is detained. As soon as he arrives, the police tell him,

Police: "Sir, your son was arrested for shoplifting in the area." 

The father, visibly taken aback, clenches his fists. Sweating, and unable to contain himself, he breathes: 

"Shop lifting?! I always knew you could bench, son!" 

Did you know Doctor Frankenstein used to be a lonely, lonely man? Then he learned how to make friends. 
So Donald Trump signs an Executive Order reviving the Dakota Pipeline ... He says "Look at this Italian Stripper Dakota Pipilini ... laid by 100 men in 6 months!" 
What's the difference between an attractive date and a not attractive date? His bank account.
Why do engineers make horrible parents? Because they're taught to neglect everything.
What's the difference between a job interview and being hired? You can tell them you're lazy once you are hired. :)
Did you hear how Reddit banned r/altright? They pressed Ctrl+Altright+Del.
My dyslexic friend... My dyslexic friend told me about a laugher house near him... he said he'd go and see if it was any good... if it was he'd bring me next time... you know... it's been a few years and he must still be in there...

[NOTE: I'M SORRY IF THIS IS A REPOST OR A BAD JOKE, I JUST WANTED TO THROW A, POSSIBLY, NEW JOKE INTO THE MIX]
Where should children with ADHD be sent? A Concentration Camp!
What kind of underwear does the Alt-Right wear? Tighty Righties.
My wife asked if I will ever stop quoting Gangsta's Paradise The way things are going I don't know
The two villages were troubled. They were constantly being forced to search for other places to fish in the river. There was a massive bear that paraded the shores on both sides and this made fishing difficult for both villages that lie on opposite sides of the river. 

Earlier there used to be a small pack of wolves that paraded the shores and now they were forced in the villages because of the bear. This posed a problem as they started attacking the livestock. The village elders decided to meet on the high bridge that connected them together to see who can help with this situation. 

When the elders met on the bridge, with all the other villagers in tow, they argued for an hour and didn't reach any conclusion. Then when all hope was about to be lost, Peter jumped from the bridge in the river. Having witnessed this the bear rushed to kill him. The villagers looked at this in awe from above. 

Peter somehow swims on the shore and smacks the head of the prancing bear with a large stone. The bear drops dead. Having witnessed that the bear is out of the way, the wolves run down and start attacking Peter. But one by one, Peter takes them all out. 

Having seen all this, the villagers start to celebrate as Peter comes to meet the elders. Everyone is congratulating him on his bravery but Peter looked unfazed by all this. 

One of the elders comes to him and says, "Peter, for this bravery, all of us have decided that we'll offer you something big, what do you want? A house? A really pretty wife? A field? You say it and we'll give it to you!!" 

To this Peter replies, "I only want one thing, I wanna know which motherf**er pushed me off the bridge!!" 
Whats worse than finding your wife at a brothel? Finding a fucking orangutang in a brothel.
What's got two wings and an arrow? A Chinese telephone.
What do you call a dinosaur that sings? A velocirapper
The only people that look up to school shooters... ..are the students on the ground
Why is 17 referred to as the "Hot Cousin" in black jack? Because you want to hit it but you'd probably bust and everyone be pissed at you.
Donkey Racing in Texas. A Preacher who wanted to raise money for his church was told there was a fortune in horse racing, so he decided to purchase one and enter it in the races. However, at the local auction the going price for horses was too steep so the preacher ended up buying a donkey. He figured that since he had it, he might as well go ahead and enter it in the races. The donkey came in 3rd. The next Day the daily racing form carried the headline:

**“Preachers Ass Shows”**

The Preacher was so pleased with the donkey that he entered it in the race again. This time he won. The form read:

**“Preachers Ass Out in Front”**

 The Bishop was upset with this kind of publicity and he ordered the preacher not to enter his donkey in another race. The newspaper headline read:

**“Bishop Scratches Preachers Ass”**

This was too much for the bishop and he ordered the preacher to get rid of the animal. The Preacher decided to give it to a nearby convent. The newspaper headline read:

**“Nun Has Best Ass in Town”**

The Bishop fainted; He informed the nun that she would have to dispose of the donkey. She finally found a farmer who was willing to buy the donkey for $10. The next day the newspaper headline read:

**“Nun Peddles Ass for Ten Bucks”**

They buried the Bishop the next day. The final headline read:

**“Too Much Ass Responsible for Bishops Death”**

I always wondered why they say space smells like seared steak Then I remember the Challenger disaster
I was reading Reddit at this Restaurant When this guy at the table next to me started grabbing his chest and fell to the floor. The waitress yelled out "Does anyone know CPR??!!" "Well heck" I said, "I know the entire alphabet!" And everyone laughed and laughed. Well ... all except one guy. 
What do you call a quadriplegic moose wearing a Guy Fawkes mask? A non-knee moose!

Ba-dum-tiss
Why didn't hydrogen want to room with fluorine in college? Fluorine was so electronegative all the time.
This woman just caught me looking down her top. I panicked so much I almost fell off the toilet seat. 
Why did Hitler approve of his mathematicians? They were all ~z-s. 
Want a new perspective that's not AltRight? Try CtrlAltRight.
In my day, men were men, and women were secretaries.
I'm a new actor and just shot a pilot... ...turns out I wasn't supposed to use a loaded gun.
I try not to comment about what is in the news but... I have seen a lot of hate spewed in recent days about a man who is a constant winner and overachiever, and that's what the people who support him like about him. Yes, he's been caught in some lies and maybe twisted the truth a little but he's still out there proving his haters wrong time after time! Some people are just jealous of someone who is successful and has money. Throw in a hot foreign model at his side and they hate even more. You may not have wanted him in this role, but he's there now and there's nothing you can do about it. I know its just going to get worse over the next several days, but like it or not, Tom Brady is in the Super Bowl.
Don't take life too seriously. You'll never get out of it alive
30 people were waiting in line to get punched in the face... I guess you could call that the punch line.
A priest sees a self-made millionaire take some money out of the poorbox When the priest asks why,

The millionaire looks down and replies "I just got divorced"
Me at my second rodeo: This ain't my first rodeo
What kind of veggies do you eat before going out to the club? Turn-Up Greens
Beyonce is pregnant! She's having twins!  
The media will refer to them as Bey's BeyBeys.
Sign of the times: if you win a million bucks as a contestant on "The Wall" ...they make Telemundo pay for it.
What do Spanish priests put on the communion bread? Soy sauce
What's not alright The altright
My first time on an elevator was quite uplifting... The second time was a let down. 
A couple of blondes were talking about things they got while shopping So i bought a new toilet brush.

Is it any good?

No, not really. I think toilet paper works better.
Son: Dad, I’ve never heard you pull a joke before, have you ever pulled one? Dad:	Sure son, I had to pull one back in ‘97  
Son:	But that’s when I was born  
Dad:	Exactly  

Why did the scarecrow get an award? because he was out standing in his field.
Why did the cannibal cross the road? To get to the body shop!
How do you know if an autistic guy likes you? He looks at your shoes while he jerks off.
I found a way to make my penis 6 inches long. Fold it in half!
How did Billy Mays die? He confused his Oxi-Clean with his Cocaine.
Claustrophobia (fear of having no escape, and being closed) When you walk towards a pub, ... and you are afraid that it might be closed.
How do you turn a duck into a soul singer? Put it in the microwave until its bill withers.
My girlfriend is like bread. It's easy to get a rise out of her. 
How do you catch a unique rabbit? Unique up on it!!

How do you catch a tame rabbit?

Tame way, unique up on it!
I LOVE ISIS She's my favorite Egyptian god
Politics A little boy goes to his dad and asks, "What is politics?" The dad says, "Well son, let me try to explain it this way: I'm the breadwinner of the family, so let's call me capitalism. Your mother, she's the administrator of the money, so we'll call her the government. We're here to take care of your needs, so we'll call you the people. The nanny, we'll consider her the working class. And your baby brother, we'll call him the future. Now, think about that and see if that makes sense." The little boy goes off to bed thinking about what dad had said. Later that night, he hears his baby brother crying, so he gets up to check on him. He finds that the baby has soiled his diaper. The little boy goes to his parents' room and finds his mother sound asleep. Not wanting to wake her, he goes to the nanny's room. Finding the door locked, he peeks in the keyhole and sees his father in bed with the nanny. He gives up and goes back to bed. The next morning, the little boy says to his father, "Dad, I think I understand the concept of politics now." The father says, "Good son, tell me in your own words what you think politics is all about." The little boy replies, "Well, while capitalism is screwing the working class, the government is sound asleep, the people are being ignored and the future is in deep shit."
What did the circumference of a circle say to its diameter? Want some pi?
Hey girl, are you an integral? Because I want to substitute u for my x.
And the Lord said onto John: "Come forth John and you will receive eternal life" But John came 5th and won a toaster
Why did Trump retract claims that George Soros was behind the paid protestors that have taken to the streets since his inauguration? He was jealous that Soros had created more jobs than he had.
What did the pirate say when he turned 80? Aye matey
Apparently someone in London gets stabbed every 52 secconds Poor bastard
Whats green, fuzzy and if it fell out of a tree would kill you? A pool table.
Women call me ugly untill they find out how much money i make Then they call me ugly and poor
My friend recently took up origami... My friend recently took up origami, although he's not very good at making creases, and every time he messes up he gets angrier and angrier...


Trust me, you wouldn't want to be there when it all unfolds...
What do you call an elephant crossed with a rhino? 'Eliphino? 
TIL What a lay up was. Explains a lot.
How do you turn a duck into a soul singer? Put it in the microwave until it's bill withers.
I try to teach my dad a new lesson every day. They say it's good to learn from your mistakes. 
What do you call an Incompetent Female Arsonist? A Farcenist
A Mexican finds a Genie Lamp along the beach... He rubs it, and the genie bellows out.

"Behold, mortal, and I will grant you one wish!"

And so, the Mexican thinks hard, and finally replies, "I wish all of my people were at peace and at our homeland.

And so, every Hispanic on the globe is suddenly teleported to Spain.

After an hour passes, an Asian walks down the beach, and finds the lamp.

Expectedly, He rubs it, and the genie bellows out.

"Behold, mortal, and I will grant you one wish!"

The Asian thinks hard, and finally replies, "I wish all of my people were at peace and at our homeland."

And so, every Asian on the globe was suddenly transported to China, Japan, Korea, and surrounding countries.

After another hour passes, an African walks along the same beach, and finds the lamp.

As one can expect, He rubs it, and the genie bellows out.

"Behold, mortal, and I will grant you one wish!"

The African thinks hard, and finally replies, "I wish all of my people were at peace and at our homeland." 

And so, every African on the globe was transported to Africa.

After another hour, a White person walks down the beach, and discovers the lamp.

He rubs it, and the genie bellows out.

"Behold, mortal, and I will grant you one wish!"

The White, hearing of the other races disappearing, asked, "So the Mexicans have gone back to Mexico and Spain?"

The genie simply replies,"Yes."

The white continues, "And the Asians have gone back to Asia, and the Africans have gone back to Africa?"

The genie once again replies with,"Yes, and Yes."

So, the white being completely content, said, "Shoot, well I'll just have a Coke!"
A man is prescribed a medication by his doctor. The doctor warns the man that because the medication has a bitter taste he should take it with something to mask the flavor, like apple juice. The man replies, "That's a good idea. I hate the taste of apple juice."
What's a civilian called in military slang? A collateral damage still alive.
Remember, big brains are important... but big muscles are importanter
My Parents always told That you should learn from mistakes. That's Why they have so many books about children.
I know a farmer who likes throwing darts at his mating donkeys for fun He's a pain in the fucking ass
Had to take a drug test for Calculus. Had to take a drug test for Calc. 2 
It was a P-test.
Have you guys heard of the new semen-based hair gel? It's the next generation.
Two silkworms were in a wrestling match. It ended in a tie.
Sex Doll Do muslim sex dolls blow themselves up?
A slave say to another slave... Are you free tonight?
A man saw a woman on the street and started physically abusing her She asks, "What are you doing?!"

The man says "I'm hitting on you".
My Daughter Texted Asking for Money... My daughter in college sent a text saying "PLZ snd $$."

I asked her why she used the shorthand. She responded that it was shorter than writing it all out.

I replied back "No."

She asked why. 

I said it was shorter than writing "Yes."
A factory inspector pays a visit to a ruler factory... and he walks in through the door. As he's walking around, he notices a room with a black man in a thong, and a lot of boxes. He finds this rather odd, but he decides to ignore it. After that, the factory manager comes to greet him. "Good morning, sir", he says. "Please. Follow me." The factory inspector follows the manager to a conveyor belt. "These are our conveyor belt workers. They check the rulers on the conveyor belt for defects", explains the manager. The factory inspector nods. He then follows the manager to an area where workers are loading rulers into boxes. "These are our loading workers. They load the rulers into boxes." Once again, the factory inspector nods. Finally, the manager leads the factory inspector into the strange room he had seen before. "This is Tyrone. He makes sure all our rulers are exactly 12 inches."
I just found out that Santa Clause raises livestock in between Christmas... I guess you could call him a Jolly Rancher
A gorilla that swung too far A zoo was barely making ends meet. The head zookeeper was keeping things together, but it was a struggle. Instead of a pride of lions, they had one lone lion. Instead of a band of gorillas, just two. The rest of the zoo animals were just as sparse.

One day during a thunder and lightning storm, a single bolt of lightning struck the two remaining gorillas and killed them both instantly. Thankfully due to the storm, there were no people visiting the zoo and so the general public wasnt aware of the tragedy. The head zookeeper pulled a staff member aside and said "Hey, I've got a gorilla suit in the back. Why dont you put it on every day, get in the habitat and act like a gorilla and I'll see that you get paid an extra $50 a day."

The staff member agreed, and everything seemed to be working out fine. The public thought it was an authentic gorilla, the staff member made an extra $50 a day and the zoo didnt have to go through the trouble of finding a new gorilla plus deal with the financial hassle of maintaining a real animal.

The staff member realized one day that he could swing on the artificial vines on the tree in the habitat. He got quite good at it, and would at times swing out so far that he would leave the gorilla enclosure. The head zookeeper didnt care because he knew the gorilla was really a man in a gorilla suit, so he let it continue. The public loved it, thinking that a real gorilla was actually getting out of the enclosure, it heightened their sense of enjoyment.

One fateful day, when the staff member gave a particularly vigorous swing, his momentum carried him quite far out of the range of the gorilla enclosure. In fact, he realized he was directly over the lion habitat. At that moment, the artifical vine snapped, and he tumbled down through the air. He landed flat on his back, knocking the wind out of him.

The lone lion saw the gorilla fall, and sprang over with a roar. The man in the gorilla suit was terrified, and as his breath returned to him, he began to yell for help. "SAVE ME!!! I'M NOT A REAL GORILLA!!!" he yelled. At that moment, the lion moved his jaws towards the monkey head, opened his mouth and said...

"Shut up you idiot, or we will both lose our jobs!"
What's the Difference Between America and "Keeping Up With the Kardashians"? I don't even know at this point...
2 guys fighting over who has the smartest dog The first guys dog runs around, sets up the tent, lights a fire, and cooks a boiled. 

The second guy says "that's nothing"! His dog runs around, sets up the tent, lights a fire, cooks a boiled egg, and then stands up on his front legs with his bum in the air. 

The first guy says, "what's he doing that for?" The second guy says "he knows I need something to hold my boiled egg"
Whats a Mexican gangsters favorite brand of pants? Dickies. They love the way they feel on their ass.
How many dead hookers in a basement does it take to change a light bulb? I'm not sure, but it's more than four because it's still fucking dark down there
A 10-year old boy heard some screaming and rustling coming from his parent's room... Thinking there is something wrong, he rushes in and sees his dad sweating and panting, and his mom turning red with embarrassment. 
"What are you doing?" Asked the boy.
"Playing poker." Replied the dad.
"Oh, but what's mom doing here?"
The dad thinks about it, and replies, "she's my wild card, and you have to have a wild card to play poker."
Satisfied, he leaves the room. Halfway down the hall he hears similar screams and sounds coming from his grandparent's room, so he bursts in and sees his grandpa and grandma both naked and holding each other.
"Now what are you doing?" Asked the boy.
"I'm playing poker." Said the grandpa. 
"And what about grandma?"
The grandpa thinks about it, and replies, "well, she's my wild card, and you have to have a wild card to play poker."
The boy turns and goes back to his room... 

The house fills with screaming and groaning. The dad and grandpa run into the hallway and open the little boys room where the sounds are coming from.
"What are you doing in here?!?!" Asked the dad.
"I'm playing poker!" Said The boy. 
"But you need to have a wild card to play poker." Said the grandpa.
The boy ponders on this and answers, "Not if you have a good hand." 
The local police station got broke into today and they stole all the toilets... The police have got nothing to go on
A man with no arms is looking for a job He searches the newspaper, and sees an ad to ring the bell in a church tower for minimum wage. Elated, he heads on over to the church and asks someone at the church if he can have the job. The person responds, "but how will you ring the bell without any arms?" So the man walks the many stairs up to the top of the tower, takes ten big steps back from the bell, runs forward as fast as he can and smashes his head right into the side of the bell. *Clang,* goes the bell. Impressed, the church person gives him the job. 

Every day for weeks from then on the man would walk all the way up the many stairs to the top of the tower, take ten big steps back from the bell, run forward as fast as he could and smash his head right into the side of the bell. And every day the bell goes *clang* in response. 

Until one day, the man took one too many steps back, slips off the edge of the tower, and *splats* onto the ground, dead. 

An obese woman screams. 

One man yells "who was that man who fell from the tower?" 

Another man responds "I don't know, but his face rings a bell."
64% of statistics are made up 90% of you didn't know that. 
Wife wanted. A man inserted an 'ad' in the classifieds: "Wife wanted." 

Next day he received a hundred letters. They all said the same thing: "You can have mine."
What results when you cross a Hippo and a Crocodile? Pretty sure you die. 
What did Japanese-mexican name his cat? Ari-gato
I'm instructor flashbang I earned that nickname from my ex-wife I don't get it but it kinda stuck 
I went on a date with a 45 year old woman. Me: Would you like a drink?
Her: No thanks, I tried it once a didnt like it.
Me: Oh ok, that's unusual.
Her: Not really, my daughter's exactly the same.
Me: Your only child I assume?
All these women on the 48 dating sites I’ve joined,  seem so fucking sad and desperate.
A girl at work asks if I think she's a 10... I said "you're an 11."
"Aww really?" she says with a huge smile.
I said "yeah , you've got a great personality as well and that adds at least 10 points."
What's the difference between 9/11 and a Cow? America can't milk a cow for 15 years
4, 6, 8 and 9 have all been killed. 2, 3, 5, 7 and 11 are the prime suspects.

A nun asks another What would you do if someone with bad intentions gets ahold of you?

Nun: I would lift up my dress

Other Nun: Oh my! What would you do then?

Nun: I would ask him to put his pants down

Other Nun: Wow. I didn't expect this from you. What would you do after?

Nun: I would run away. I bet I can run faster lifting my skirt than he can with his pants down.
A guy and a girl go on a first date. They go to the carnival that is in town. The guy asks her, what's the first thing you want to do? She says to get weighed.  He's says alright let's go, takes her to the carny that that will guess her weight. The carny guesses 108lbs, she says he's wrong that she's 112lbs. So she gets to pick out a stuffy.

So the guy asks her, now what would you like to do? She replies, get weighed. He thinks to himself that's odd but ok, proceeds to take her to the weigh booth again. The carny guesses her weight at 112lbs. No stuffy for her.

He then asks her, now what do you want do? She replies again, get weighed. He figures this chick is crazy and this date is going no where so he calls it a night, drives her home and tells her this just won't work.

The girl walks into her apartment and her roommate asks her, how did the date go? She replies, wousy.
How do oysters get around? In mussel cars.
I've got a part time job making rubberised computer keyboards. They offer flexible shifts.
I got drunk and hired a cheap lawyer last night. Think I might have contracted something...
I wish that I could buy the new iPhone... but iBroke.
Why doesn't Massachusetts have a Debate team? Because it would be called the Mass-Debate team.
Why did the blonde get so excited when she finished her jigsaw puzzle in only 6 months? Because on the box it said "From 2-4 years."
A bodybuilder named Scott A bodybuilder named Scott is working out at the gym and has just deadlifted 600 pounds, a personal best. Still holding the bar, he looks over to his trainer, who shouts:

"Great, Scott!"

And he replies: "I know, this is heavy."
"My name is Talia, my mother gave me that name." [NSFW] Batman: Is your first name Jenny? Coz then you'd be Jennytalia, and I hear you're a total cu**.
First day of class at Hogwarts A group of first-year students walked into a classroom at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. The professor, Febuina Pell, was young for her profession and had never married, but was well respected and had written the very textbook to be used in the class. One of the students, a muggle-born child, gazed in awe at the chalk dancing across the board as it spelled out the professor's name. As they began the lesson, the muggle-born student struggled with one of the spells. He was reading it straight from his second-hand book, but his wand just wasn't responding as it should. It would spew yellow flames in all directions, repeatedly striking the bells in the tall clock in the corner or even landing in the ink wells on the desks, sizzling as the flames sputtered out. After searing his eyebrows for the 3rd time, he raised his hand for the professor to come over and help him. She looks over his shoulder, sees the writing in his book, and immediately recognizes the issue. The previous owner had spilled some tea on the pages and had attempted to re-write some of the words where the ink had faded. The result? Miss Pell's spell was misspelled, causing a mis-spell from hell for the bells and the wells.
What is the best mexican food to eat while you're watching Netflix? andchill-adas
A tragic case of malpractice and injustice So this unfortunate fellow comes down with gangrene and goes to the doctor. The doctor tells him that the leg will have to be removed. After the operation the man wakes up and to his horror the doctor had amputated the wrong leg. Of course the doctor had to go back in immediately and take off the correct leg. Months later the malpractice case was brought to court but the judge threw it out immediately as the plaintiff didn't have a leg to stand on.
How many vampires showed up to the garlic eating competition? I don't know, it was countless 
Finally, i can play Golf in peace. A man and a friend are playing golf one day at their local golf course. One of the guys is about to chip onto the green when he sees a long funeral procession on the road next to the course. He stops in mid-swing, takes off his golf cap, closes his eyes, and bows down in prayer. 

His friend says: “Wow, that is the most thoughtful and touching thing I have ever seen. You truly are a kind man.” 

The man then replies: “Yeah, well...we were married for 35 years.”  
[OC] What do you tell a preacher when they invite you over for spaghetti dinner? "Pasta pasta, pasta." :)

EDIT: Say it out loud.
There were two fish in a fish tank. The first fish said, "How do you drive this thing?"  
  
The second fish said, "Holy crap! It's a talking fish!!"
If my last name were Plate, I'd open a computer repair shop... and call it Plate Tech Tonics.
"Peace out. See you guys in four years" -Democracy
A little girl gets lost in the supermarket A security guard asks her 'What's your mum like?'

'Big cocks and vodka', replied the little girl
What do you call a soup bowl from Krypton?! Well ... *a kryptonian soup bowl*, obviously.
Trump hosts Putin for a state dinner at The White House When a guest asks "Mr. President, what have the two of you been discussing all day?", to which Trump responds "Planning World War 3." The guest asks "What will that be like?" Trump: "We're going to kill 4 million muslims and one dentists." The guest appears confued and asks "But why one dentist?", when Putin leans over, slaps Trump on the shoulder and says: "See Donald, what did I tell you - no one will ask about the Muslims."
Beyonce Pregnant With Twins, Names Already Chosen Red and Yellow
When I was born my father said "Now I'm certain I want two children!" I was the third.
Putin, Hillary and Trump crash in a freak plane accident 100 kilometres into oacean from cuba. They all 3 drifting in saving raft. 
But luck! Trump finds 2 paddles, and they decide to row towards Cuba.
Now they have to decide who will row.
Before everyone becomes sexist, Hillary suggests to hold democratic election.
After election as Hillary and Trump are rowing, Trump silently whispers to Hillary: "Don't you think Putin cheated? There is only three of us in raft, but each of us both got 5 votes..."
Beyonce is having twins! I wonder if they will be Red ivy and Green ivy
I wasn't sure about how to ask the love of my life to marry me So, I decided to ask her husband for advice.
A man goes to a priest . . . [OC - I just made this up!] . . . And confesses his sins. 

"Forgive me father, for I have sinned," he says. "I see a different woman every night." 

The priest frowns. "You have sinned greatly, young man, for every time you engage in intercourse with a different woman, a part of your soul is left in her. However, I forgive you." 

The man thanks the priest and continues on his way, vowing to never do it again - but later that night, he stumbles upon a gorgeous woman at a bar, who introduces herself as Mrs. Crux. Back at his house, he is engaging in intercourse with her. She asks him to speak dirty to her. He thinks for a moment, then cries, 

"You're my whore, Crux!" 
Why did the chicken cross the road? He didn't because I'm vegetarian and offended.
The only thing smaller than Donald Trump's hands... The only thing smaller than Donald Trump's hands is Donald Trump's heart!
A group of four-year-olds were trying hard to become accustomed to school. The biggest hurdle they faced was that the teacher insisted on NO baby talk!

"You need to use 'big people' words," she was always reminding them.  "John, what did you do over the weekend?"

"I went to visit my Nana."

"No, you went to visit your GRANDMOTHER.  Use 'big people' words!"  She then asked Mitchell what he had done.

"I took a ride on a choo-choo."

"No, you took a ride on a TRAIN.  You must remember to use 'big people' words," she said.  She then asked little Alex what he had done.

"I read a book," he replied.

"That's wonderful!" the teacher said.  "What book did you read?"

Alex thought very hard about it, then puffed out his chest with great pride and said, "Winnie the SHIT!"
MOM! at school they tell me i'm too distracted! kid, i'm the neighbour, your house is across the street.
Back at school, I had a weird geometry teacher. He had warts all over his nose, and they had to remove a bit of his face due to an accident. You could say he had an...

Irregular sir face.
What's the difference between Karl Marx and Donald Trump? Trump only advocates the seizing of a *woman's* means of production
I can't find my k+(1/4a) I guess I've lost my focus... 
I tried to rob a bank using jello cast in the shape of a gun The police charged me with carrying a congealed weapon
Some people worry drinking in the shower is a sign of alcoholism I just worry about keeping the water out of my beer 
Marriage is like blackjack Marriage is like blackjack. You can either hit or stay, but you can't do both
Dad wanted to take me out for the first drink on my 21st birthday. We arrive at the local Elks Club, sit next to a few of his friends and he orders us a round. After taking a swig of that first beer he proclaims " boys there's nothing better than cold beer and tight pussy!" To which they all agree. He then turns, points at me and says " Then Fat Head here came along and ruined one of those for me!". 
Obama was the Antichrist & Trump is a facist dictator Either America has grown more tolerant or liberals don't believe in the Antichrist.
How many Trump supporters does it take to change a lightbulb? None. They just beat the room for being black. 
What is the best secret intelligence service? MI6 have strong Bonds but the CIA Trumps all.
TIFU By making a guy choke in the middle of a long plane flight. So this happened about 2 years ago but it doesn't matter.  So I was getting on the plane when a stewardess pulled me over just to inform me that I was sitting next to a 'special person'. He had major autism and had apparently EATEN his mum when he found her dead after she had a heart attack. Anyway, u sit down next to him to see that he is dressed as a viking of sorts. He had an eyepatch covering an eye and one of those viking helmets with one of the two horns broken off. So, I say hi and his carer next to him (on the other side) says hi back. Now, this is where the fuck up happens. Mid flight, everyone gets their food for lunch, the carer asks me a question about where I was from or something, and I I was turning to answer, my arm had a spasm and followed my head with fork in hand. The fork flew around strait into the autistic mans throat. This gave me a fright and I accidentally let go of the fork. This was bad, he was choking. His carer starts calling for a steward for help, and most people are freaking out. His face had turned purple...

He was a one eyed, one horned, flying, purple, people eater.
Two firefighters Two firefighters are butt fucking in a smoke filled room. The chief walks in and yells,"what the fuck is going on in here?" The one firefighter says," he was suffering from smoke inhalation." So the fire chief asks," why didn't you try mouth to mouth?" The firefighter says," how the hell do you think this got started!"
What do you get hanging from banana trees? 

Long arms
A zebra dies and goes to heaven The zebra meets God and asks him the one true question that he's been wondering his whole life. 

"God, am I a white zebra with black stripes, or a black zebra with white stripes?"

God responds, "You are who you are."

It was then that the zebra knew he was white with black stripes. If he was black with white stripes, God would have told him, "You is who you is."
Donald Trump's releasing a hip-hop song this year Going Back To Calais
What's the difference between a penis and a vagina? [NSFW] I'd say there's quite a vas deferens.
Why did the Frenchman put snails in his gas tank? To make escargot.
I would love to be a mirror cleaner. I can see myself making a living that way...
My last relationship was like Forrest Gump She was a whore and I was retarded.
A Polak, an American, and a Russian all die and go to hell At the gates of hell, the devil tells them that they all weren't really bad people in life, and so if they can impress him, he'll let them go to heaven.  He puts each of them alone in a windowless, furniture-less, completely empty cinderblock room, and gives them two small steel balls.  He tells each of them "you have one hour.  If you can do something with these here balls that impresses me, you can go to heaven.  

So an hour goes by, and he checks on the Russian first.  "What have you done to impress me with these balls?" He asks.  He finds one ball in the middle of the room and one in the corner. "You can't be serious! Off to hell you go" he says. 

Next he goes to the American.  He finds finds the American balanced one ball perfectly on top of the other.  "Now that's pretty cool.  But I'm still not impressed.  Off to hell for you too". 

Finally he comes to the Polak's room.  "What have you done with the balls to impress me?" He asks.  The Polak replies "Forgive me pan lucifer, I broke one and lost the other". The devil is so impressed that he managed to break a steel ball and lose one in a completely empty room that he lets him o to heaven.  
Little Matt is doing his math homework ... Little Matt is doing his math homework, with his dad watching the news, not far away in the living room. “2 plus 3, the son of bitch is 5”. His dad thinks he misheard, so he doesn’t say anything. His son, very applied, goes on with his questions sheet. “4 plus 5, the son of bitch is 9”. 

His dad is definitely sure of what he just heard, but as he’s ready to ask, little Matt answers the next: “1 plus 6, the son of bitch is 7”.

-	“Matt, stop! What’s going on there?”
-	“Nothing dad, just doing my homework”
-	“Yeah, but what did you just say?”
-	“I said, ‘the son of bitch is’, as the teacher taught us, dad”

His father is livid. He won't allow cursing in his house. He calls little Matt’s teacher and has Matt repeat how he does math. The teacher laughs and tells the father “I see! When I give them an example on the board, I say ‘1 plus 1, the sum of which is 2”. 

The father, confused, replied “anyway, thanks for letting me know. But I am still wondering where this little son of a bitch got that type of language from.”

Why did the Secret Service arrest the recently immigrated masseuse? They said Melania told the masseuse after he was done to give the President a fist bump, not to fist Trump.
What was Harper Lee's favourite spirit to drink when she went claypigeon shooting? Tequila Mockingbird
A man frantically walks into the doctor's office... ...and begins to shout, "I'm a teepee! I'm a wigwam! I'm a teepee! I'm a wigwam!"

"Calm down, calm down!" The doctor says.

"You're two tents!"
Walking home after a girls' night out, two women pass a graveyard and stop to pee... The first woman has nothing to wipe with, so she uses her underwear and tosses it. 

Her friend, however, finds a ribbon on a wreath, so she uses that. 

The next day, the first woman's husband phones the second woman's husband, furious: "My wife came home last night without her panties!" 

"That's nothing," says the other. "Mine came back with a card stuck between her butt cheeks that said, 'From all of us at the fire station, we'll never forget you.'"
What does the pirate sell his corn for on the side of the street? Buck an ear. 
It's a medical breakthrough! An Israeli doctor says: "In Israel, medicine is so advanced that we cut out a man's liver put it into another man, and in 6 weeks, he is looking for work."

The German doctor says: "That's nothing, in Germany we took a part of a brain, put it in another man, and in 4 weeks he is looking for work."

The Russian doctor says: "Gentlemen, we took half a heart from a man, put it in another's chest, and in 2 weeks he is looking for work."

The American doctor laughs: "You all are behind us. About a week ago, we took a man with no brains, no heart, and no liver and made him our President.

Now, the whole country is looking for work!" 
What do you call a sad marijuana pipe? Miserabowl!
You Eat What? knock knock

who's there?

I eat yerp

I eat yerp who

That's disgusting, please stop 
Did you guys hear about Mike Pence? His favorite supreme Court case is Nix v. Hadden involving the federal classification of the tomato. It's cause he loves when the government turns fruits into vegetables.
What are the two most important holes in a womans body? No!! Not them you dirty bastards!!!!

Its her nostrils...they allow her to breathe while she's sucking your dick.
I fingered my girlfriend during her period Her parents caught me red handed.
What's the difference between a near death experience and a booty call? One is ducking fate and the other is a...
Why was the broom late? It overswept!
What's the favorite food of infinity. Cocaine. Cos it's a high number. 
Did you hear about the rebellious Hebrew child? He went out and got stoned with his mates.
A blind man takes a stool sample to the hospital Everyone is looking at him with disgust as he asks for the optical department. 

"Sir the laboratory is to the right"

"I don't need to go to the laboratory"

He hops on the elevator and yet again is told the laboratory is to the right

"I don't need to go to the laboratory! I need the optical department"

Finally he gets there and the doctor looks at the sample and says

"Sir this isn't the laboratory"

The blind man out of rage then tells him

"I don't need the godamn laboratory! I need to go to the optical department because every time I do this my eyes get watery!" 
There's a rumor going around that someone in my group of friends is gay... I hope it's Josh, he's pretty cute.
Been reading a fascinating memoir about Latino street culture. It's a collection of esés. 
I'm thinking about moving to Switzerland... For a couple of reasons, but their flag is a big plus. 
Who is Pitbulls favorite sports icon? Dale! Earnhardt Jr. 
What do you call a fake TV bought on craigslist? A video-con.
What do you do when a chemist dies? You barium.
Why is a cat like a joke? If you dissect it, it dies. 
What kind of table is good for your health? A vegetable!

This joke was made by adorable 8-year-old niece!

It wasn't. It was made by a 27 year old. Me. It was made by me.
How does Princess Leia like her showers? Lukewarm.
The other day I had food poisoning And I had diarrhea for a whole week. I shit you not
I haven't lost my virginity yet... Because i never lose
What would the name be of a magician duo containing a chicken and a deaf woman? Hen and Keller. 
Little Johnnie and Uncle Ron's morals. Little Johnnie was in his 4th grade class one day when his teacher gave them an assignment.

"Okay kids, tonight you have a homework assignment, go home and ask your families to tell you a story that has a moral", the teacher said.

The next day little Johnnie is sitting in class when he was called upon to share his moral.

"Do you have a story Johnnie?", she asked.

"Yes ma'am", he replied. "My Uncle Ron told me a story of when he was in the war.  He said he was in a chopper on the way to an evac zone when the chopper pilot was shot and wounded.  As the chopper went down Uncle Ron found a case of whiskey and started drinking.  When the chopper landed a platoon of enemy soldiers came out of the tree line and started attacking!  Uncle Ron finished the last bottle of whiskey, jumped out of the chopper and killed half of the platoon with his rifle in a long heated battle. When he ran out of ammo he charged in head first and beat the other half of the platoon to death with his bare hands!  He then loaded the wounded in the chopper and jumped in the pilot's seat, with no training whatsoever he flew the chopper out of the area and to safety!"

"Oh, uhhh, oh my." She said noticeably flustered. "Well, is the moral of the story how in the face of great adversity people can overcome anything?"

Little Johnnie replied, "Face of gre... no, the moral of the story is don't fuck with Uncle Ron when he's been drinking."

Another college girl with a very active sex life... She especially loved hooking up with prisoners and professional ice hockey players. Those were kind of her fetishes, and she didn't know why. She didn't really like to use condoms, though, which was very dumb of her, and she knew that, but she thought it felt so much better without one. Also, she was on birth control.

Only, one day, her period didn't come as expected. She thought it was probably nothing, but she was suspicious nonetheless. She went to the store and bought a pregnancy test, and, lo and behold, she was indeed pregnant. Well, shit. Due to her active sex life and having slept with all those pro players and prison boys, she didn't really know, which one of them had gotten her pregnant. She thought about what she was to do. Should she keep the baby? How could she find the father? And then it hit her.

She had to make a list of all the pros and cons.
My sister bet me a hundred dollars I couldn’t build a car out of spaghetti. You should've seen the look on her face as I drove pasta!
Two Guys in a Jail cell There's two guys in a cell and the one the guys says to the other :

Man 1 : since we in here fo life, me and you gonna get married. But I'm nice... I'll let you decide if you wanna be the husband or the wife .

Man 2: "The husband of course"
Man 1:  "Then why don't you come here and suck your wife's dick.
Putin, Trump, and Merkel are walking down a beach... ... Somewhere off the coast of Spain. They're enjoying themselves, toes in the sand, talking lightheartedly about trivial matters under the bright, warm sun, when Putin brings up the topic of submarines. "Russian sub engineering is the greatest in the world!" Explains Putin, "Our subs can stay underwater hunting stealthily for six months at a time." "Hah, Sad! That's nothing compared to the American brilliance, pathetic!" boasted Trump, "Our subs have been under for the past two years without surfacing, Excellent! Some are even built underwater, Wonderful!" Meanwhile, Merkel appeared somewhat uninterested in the topic, gazing off into the sea. All of a sudden, a great rumbling and frothing appeared on the surface of the water, and a metal porthole popped up. The lid opened, a raggedy old man crawled out, flopped through the water to the beach, and rolled over to the leaders, before rising to his feet and saluting, declaring 
"We are in need of food in water in order to continue our path to glory, oh, and HEIL HITLER!"

That day in lab I nearly made a science joke ...but my friend said Na.
Did you hear about the new tax law Trump has issued? I don't know much about it but it seems tariff-eyeing.
TIFU by accidentally giving my girlfriend my sandwich that had extra cheese when she's lactose intolerant Whoops, wrong sub. 
What did the number 0 say to the number 8? "Nice belt."
I feel very akward when I watch dance instruction videos. Always staring at the feet.
Where does the king keep his armies? In his sleevies
My girlfriend broke up with me cause I stole her wheelchair But I knew she'd come crawling back to me.

Yo mama so fat Aliens thought she was our Dyson Sphere
People say I'm superficial ...but that's just on the surface.
Where do Christians go after throwing up? Heave'in
What do you call a homeless horse? Unstable.
A drunk guy looks at a wanted poster... And thinks 'why would they let him go after clicking the pic'
Backstage at Project Runway, Tim walked past me holding some coffee. I said, "Hey, Gunn, where you going with that joe in your hand?"
It's still hard to take Trump seriously. For some reason I get the feeling he's just Putin us on.
Why did a banana go to the doctor? because he wasnt.. peeling well hahahah 

(ill find the door)
Doctor's Discussion An Israeli doctor says : " In Israel , medicine is so advanced that we cut off a man 's liver put them on another man , and in 6 weeks , he is looking for work . " The German doctor says : " That 's nothing , in Germany we take part of a brain , put it in another man , and in 4 weeks he is looking for work . " The Indian doctor says : " Gentlemen , we take half a heart from a man , put it in another 's chest , and in 2 weeks he is looking for work . " The American doctor laughs : " You all are behind us . Two days ago , we took a man with no brains , no heart , and no liver and made him President.
I used to date a girl that only had one leg... Her name was Ilene and she worked at IHOP  
My girlfriend is a Trump supporter who ran out of breakfast bread. She lacks toast and tolerance.
What do you call the hair on a cows lip? A Moo-stache.


 > The perks of having too much free time in a call center.
One saggy boob said to the other saggy boob... "We need to pick ourselves up otherwise everyone will think we're nuts"
My girlfriend often accuses me of telling sexist, condescending jokes that target women. I've explained to her those jokes are actually ironic jabs at the current state of post-modern feminism, designed to highlight societal double standards across genders. 

So she needn't worry her pretty little head about it.
Did you hear about that mentally disabled kid who shoved a burger up his ass? I think he's got assburger syndrome. 
After a long day of eroding civil rights, Donald can't wait to get home and remove Melania's panties. She really gets upset when he stretches them out.
You get the most from a Women's Studies degree when you... ...spend a semester studying abroad.
What is Snoop's favorite contraction? We'd
A prostitute asks her doctor if he could drill another hole next to her ass. The surprised doctor asks why...? "Business is going well, I want to open another branch" she replied.
MI6 is Hiring MI6 needed a new recruit, they had thousands of applicants. Needing only one person, they held multiple tests, and interviews, until they finally narrowed it down to these last three men, an Englishman, an Irishman, and a Scotsman.

The Chief of MI6 had one final test. A test that would surely be able to leave them with one man at the most.

He invites the Englishman to a room, this room had two doors, one where they entered and another directly behind the chief. In the middle, between the doors was a desk, where the Chief sat.

"Morning lad", Said the director, "What exactly are you prepared to do for your country?"

"Anything you tell me to do", he said proudly.

"Good.", the chief responded. He slid a handgun across the desk, toward the recruit.

"Your wife is in the next room. I want you to go in there and kill her."

The young man took the gun and slowly walked in the room. Minutes pass, and he eventually walks out and gives the weapon back.

"I'm sorry, I can't do it. I've just married her and I can't let her go."

"That's fine," the Director answered. "You're excused."

The Irishman comes in next, an older chap. The same scenario plays out, gun is handed to him, he is told his wife is in the next room, he enters and shuts the door behind himself and after a few minutes pass he eventually comes out.

"I can't do it", says the older recruit, "I've been married for two years, she's my wife and the mother of my children."

The director excuses him, and in comes the Scotsman.

"We have one last test", Said the director.

"Yeah, what is it, then?", he said.

He slides the gun across the desk. "Your wife is in the next room. Go kill her."

"The misses?" He asked.

The director nodded. The * went in the room, closed the door, and barely time has passed before shots are heard.

BANG... BANG BANG BANG BANG BANG

A few more seconds pass.

CRASH CRASH CRASH CRASH CRASH CRASH

The Scott stumbles out, exhausted. The Chief stands up.

"What the bloody hell was that all about?!", he asked in a panic.

"Well, ya see", he explained," the blasted gun was filled with blanks so I had to use the chair!"
I keep wanting to try Kraftig... But the last time Germans talked about purity my ancestors had to flee the continent.
Mike rushed into a math class while in full session Mike rushed into a math class while in full session. 
The teacher was aghast:

- Why are you so late Mike? 

Mike tried to calm down:

- Gunmen in ski masks attacked me. 

The teacher reached out to him:

- Oh My God! Are you hurt? 

Mike:

- No, but they managed to grab my homework.
What do French people do on Valentine's Day? They d'éclair their love to each other.
A Man Lost his Wife In Tsunami A Man Lost his Wife In Tsunami
One Drunk-Night ..
while standing on the Seashore, waves touching
on his feets .
He shouted to the Sea: 'No matter how many times your Waves Touch my Feet
.
.
.
I'll Never take her back .. !!
Its your mistake..
Deal With It Now....
a priest, rabbi and, caliphate walk into a bar they woke up in the hospital with a concussion. 
Doors of my house are open for you always. Get out!
Difference between twins I've fucked a set of twins.
People have asked me how hard it was to tell them apart, but it was actually quite easy. You see, Caroline was a redhead with an amazing pair of tits,
And frank had a cock.
A police officer's Siamese twin brother was a criminal... He was con fused.
Teach a man to fish, and he'll be able to eat for a lifetime. Teach a Nigerian to phish, and he'll become a prince.
Stop posting Chuck Norris jokes on the Internet. Chuck Norris will delete the internet.
I am a loyal man. When I go out shopping with my mom, I don't look at other moms.
A priest, a minister, and a rabbi hear about a bear causing trouble in the woods nearby. The three men, friendly rivals, decide among themselves that what this bear needs to be soothed is some religion, so they declare it a contest to see who can convert it. They draw straws, and the Catholic priest is the first to try.

He heads into the woods, and comes back three hours later with a few claw swipes across his face and hands, and tells the other two, "I read from the Catechism, and the bear seemed to enjoy that, but when I sprinkled him with holy water, he tried to maul me, and I ran!"

The Protestant minister is the second to go, and he's gone all evening, meeting his friends the next afternoon, with a bandage around his head and a broken leg. He says to them, "I found the bear by the river, and I preached to him from God's holy word, and he was as gentle as a lamb, until I tried to baptize him in the river; he nearly bit my head off and I had to bolt for my life!"

Lastly went the Jewish Rabbi, off into the woods. His friends hear nothing from him for two days, until they receive the word that he's in hospital. They rush over to find him in the ICU, a cast covering most of his body, and vicious wounds all over the rest of him. They frantically ask him what happened, and between laboured breaths through the ventilator, he mutters, "You know, thinking about it, I probably shouldn't've opened with the circumcision.."
Rumor has it there's a basketball court on the roof of the Supreme Court building. It's the highest court in the land. 
What is the difference between me and trash? Nobody takes me out
I didn't know what to get my mother for Christmas I turned to my colleagues and asked what I should get for her when my boss says "Get her some slippers and a dildo, if she doesn't like the slippers she can go and fuck herself"
I went to the doctors about my hearing.. I went to the doctors about my hearing and the doctors asked me "Can you describe the symptoms?"

I said "Yeah, Homer's fat and Marge has blue hair"
Man walks into a restaurant and asks the waiter "what's the special today?" Waiter replies "Oasis soup" - Man: "why is it called Oasis soup?" Waiter replies "cos you get a *roll with it*"
To whoever stole my copy of Microsoft Office: I will find you.. You have my Word.
A young man goes into a drug store to buy condoms. The pharmacist says the condoms come in packs of 3, 9 or 12 and asks which the young man wants. 

"Well," he said, "I've been seeing this girl for a while and she's really hot. I want the condoms because I think tonight's "the" night. We're having dinner with her parents, and then we're going out. And I've got a feeling I'm gonna get lucky after that." 

"Once she's had me, she'll want me all the time, so you'd better give me the 12 pack." 

The young man makes his purchase and leaves. 

Later that evening, he sits down to dinner with his girlfriend and her parents. 

He asks if he might give the blessing and they agree. 

He begins the prayer, but continues praying for several minutes. 

The girl leans over to him and says, "You never told me that you were such a religious person." The boy leans over to her and whispers, "You never told me that your father is a pharmacist."
The weirdest thing I've heard during sex is "Cum inside me." I got pretty freaked out. Why? Hands don't talk.
A couple of years ago I was about to propose to my girlfriend... A couple of years ago I was about to propose to my girlfriend when all of a sudden my friend Joseph came barging through the door, tripping directly upon my glass coffee table, broken glass all over his face. This completely ruined the mood. Now I haven't known Joe for very long at this point, hell I didn't even know where he was from, but this put my romantic plans on hold while we helped him through his injuries.

Joseph had got glass in his left eye, rendering the eye completely useless. He had to walk around for months with one of those cotton patches on while it healed. Then out of nowhere this bastard just disappeared... With my girlfriend!

Apparently through his struggling time after the injuries, they had became very close, they left me behind without as much as even a single note. I tried tracking them down through out the years but I've had no such luck.

In conclusion, if it hadn't been for cotton eye Joe, I'd have been married a long time ago. Where did you come from? Where did you go? Where did you come from, cotton eye Joe?




What do you call a round table meeting of a bunch of chronic masturbators? A circumference BADUMTSS
What makes me a good scottish man? **Well if i were a bad scottish man,i wouldn't have been discussing this with ya now would i?**
what do you get when you cross a bison with a duck? buffalo bill
Where do dogs go when they lose their tail? To the retail store
What do you can an acoholic dwarf? Just a little drunk.
I got arrested the other day after police found me covering a boy with melted sugar I was charged with child molassation
Noticing a woman sitting alone at a table in a bar... .. a man goes over to chat with her. After talking to her for a while he makes his move.

"Stop!" says the woman as the man tries to kiss her. "I'm sorry but I'm keeping myself pure until I meet the man I truly love."

"Wow", says the man, "that must be difficult."

"It's not too bad", replied the woman. "My husband's quite upset though."
I told my teacher to tell a joke He said "Want me to announce your grades?"
Holmes and Watson were investigating a murder at an archaeological dig-site Holmes picks up several of the rocks and pebbles surrounding the murder victim. After a while, Holmes turns to his companion and says "I've cracked the case. The suspect was clearly murdered with a blow to the head by a rock, which then crumbled and scattered into pieces."

"How on Earth can you tell?" exclaims Watson.

"It's sedimentary, my dear Watson."
I'm not addicted to drinking brake fluid.... I can stop any time I want.
Two silk worms are in a wrestling match It ended in a tie. 
Black History Month A kid in my class asked why we had a Black History Month and not a White History Month.

I told him we had eleven.
A man was speeding on the highway before he was pulled over by a police officer. The police officer approached his car and the man rolled down his window. 

'Sir, do you have any clue on how fast you were just going?' the police officer asked him.

'Well, I had to, didn't I officer, I was trying to get away from a crime scene. Robbery, weren't it, officer? '

'What? Why did you need to escape? Were you...involved?' the police officer questioned, slightly confused.

'Right, sir, ' he replied with his midland accent.

The police officer's immediate reaction was to open the car door and attempt to subdue the man.

'Hold on, officer. Don't go near my glove compartment, got a gun in there, don't I?'

By now, the officer was confused,  shocked and bewildered as to how these events had happened despite this man's obvious stupidity. He called backup, and in no time, police cars and helicopters flooded the scene. 

The man and his vehicle had been taken to the police station. After checks of both, a different police officer approached the man.

'Sir, one of our police officers informed us that you had stolen goods in your car as well as a gun in your glove compartment. However, after a thorough search, none of these items were found in your vehicle.'

'That liar told you that?' the man said. 'I bet he told you I was speeding as well.' 
They said "Find something you love to do and you will never work a day in your life" They are darn right,
that field isn't hiring!
Why does Donald Trump wear such a long tie? It's his leash.
My grandfather had a heart of a lion... and also a lifetime ban from the zoo.
Hitler was caught jacking off by a dead jew. Hitler: Oh no, I did Nazi you there.
I used to have a pet leech. It was attached to me.
Can't blame Monica Lewinsky for getting her dress dirty... I'm sure she just didn't see it coming...
A monster in london By the 15th century, the Templar Knights had disappeared, but deep in the bowels of the British Museum in a case well sealed and protected lies a strange memorial to their impact on the city of London.

London of the early 12th century was on its way to becoming an impressive city, but its life and its blood was the Thames River. Without the river commerce would grind to a halt as the people of London discovered to their horror in 1216.

The first ships seemed simply to have disappeared, but the monster wasted little time in this caution. Soon, many Londoners had seen the gaping maw licked by flames dragging a hapless crew to its death. It was a fire salamander, and in the Autumn of 1216 it was estimated to be 40 feet long with jaws that gaped 10 feet wide.

By the spring of 1217, the monster was no longer a nuisance, it was a deadly plague. No boat could navigate the Thames… no raft was small enough, no ship was large enough to resist the demon of the Thames. Worse, the beast was growing! The latest reports called it 70 feet long with jaws opening 15 feet. Our instinct is to discount this absurd growth, and yet few could impeach its source.

He, our source, enters the story in August of 1217. London had begged, prayed, blasphemed, and killed in desperate attempts to exorcise or appease their curse; to no avail. On June 14, four men painted themselves with the Devil’s Cross and proclaimed themselves the Dark Priests of the Beast. They built a ship and doused it in oil; then, they sailed it down the river. Dark Priests they may have been, but they died screaming like any man. On July 28, London sent three virgins (the youngest not yet 13) down the Thames to the monster. It was thought that this would appease the evil god: the monster’s hunger exceeded even this atrocity.

On August 23, our source received his summons. His given name is lost in his chosen name: Honorus. He was a Templar Knight and possibly a saint. That morning, he was commanded to destroy the beast.

London in fear and desperation had turned to their most jealous weapon, the Templars… warrior monks who fought with the fierce, perhaps fanatic, frenzy of the devout. The city had exhausted all other options; the monks were its last hope, and Honorus was the greatest of the Knights.

The battle was truly a footnote to his preparation… Honorus ventured into the woods upstream from London. He forsook shelter, clothing, food, and sleep for four days, meditating on the coming struggle. When the four days ended, he stalked and killed a stag without weapon or aid. With the skin of the stag he made clothing; from its flesh he regained his strength; and with its guts, he lashed five logs into a raft fit for his purpose.

Honorus set the raft in motion. He had outfitted himself with the only item he would use in this fight which had not come out of the forest with him. A sword of Spanish steel, blue with the sky, lay in his lap. Soon, he felt the swell of the water disturb his raft: the monster was coming, yet he sat unmoving.

The beast broke the surface.

No human is perfect; a splinter of the collapsing raft clipped Honorus’ left foot as he leapt into the water. He had timed his jump slightly too late, but no matter, the injury will not be important until after the battle.

The monster was above the water only momentarily; time enough for Honorus to drive his sword between two of its scales. The monster thrashed in pain, turning its exposed flesh from the steaming water. Honorus was lifted from the water as the beast rolled. He gauged his stroke and leapt, striking the monster’s eye.

Angered and half blinded, the beast threw Honorus into the river and grasped him in its immense jaws. Honorus swam quickly past the teeth into the monster’s mouth. Inside, the questing tongue scalded his feet as he searched for purchase again, and we shall ignore this injury for now.

Once he had braced himself inside the beast’s mouth, pushing with all his strength against the slowly rising tongue, he took aim. Honorus had time to make only one thrust.

When his journal recalls these events, it attributes Honorus’ “luck” in this battle to aid from the Divine. We do not wish to detract from the glory of God, but surely He will not envy His servant. Is it coincidence that Honorus’ blade struck true to the brain? Honorus had already studied carefully the anatomy of the salamander a week before he was summoned to fight the beast. Did Honorus not know that the water’s rush against the beast’s exposed flank would cause it such pain? In his journal, “August 24: And once I am atop the beast and it has rolled from the water, where then to strike?”

Two weeks after Honorus was told to lift the curse of London, the beast was dead. The next day London celebrated Honorus; the town would live because of him. Three days later, gratitude had disappeared.

The body of the beast had lodged itself firmly in the mire less than half a mile downstream of London. Although it was yet intact (perhaps due to its incredible armor), it would surely soon rot. While not so great a terror, the rotting beast would be almost as dangerous as the live beast, attracting disease and scavengers. No ship could move the carcass. The people of London called upon Honorus.

Honorus’ solution was difficult but practical, and he began as soon as he had retrieved his sword. He fasted for two days; then, he ate the cooked meat of the huge salamander and fasted for a third day. When he suffered no ill effects, Honorus began dissecting the beast. With the help of London, Honorus soon had all the usable meat and intestines of the dead beast transformed into sausage.

A bizarre solution it was, but a good one. The sausage was soon discovered to be excellent and to keep easily for very long periods of time. Even more important, the sausage fast became incredibly popular throughout England and much of Europe. It began to reestablish the fame of London’s trade after the Hiatus of the Beast.

Still, Honorus has one final contribution to this history… It became vital that everyone knew from whence the incredible sausage of London came, and thus we return to Honorus’ injuries.

After the battle with the live beast and the crisis of the dead beast, Honorus took time to recover. Six weeks after he was first summoned, he was dressing the injuries on his feet. The problems of London were known to him. As he dipped a strip of paper like gauze into a healing salve, he had a thought.

One week later, each sausage shipped from London carried a fascinating new development: a label. Just as the gauze dried and closed on Honorus’ foot, the parchment around these sausages was attached; and all would know the fame of London from each link she sold.

In the end, despite all his other feats, it was this idea, the product label, that survived Honorus. In tribute to this advance, the British Museum houses the only known surviving label from Honorus’ sausages. And although even the tough gut of the Beast has long since faded to dust, the label may still be read. If our reader could go to the Museum and enter the Medieval wing’s most treasured collection, she could still read, in faint letters, the Label of Honor:… It Was The Beast Of Thames, It Was The Wurst Of Thames…
the ghostly act of not respecting your equals disapeer
the pink gorilla Here it is, the one that started r/feghoot.

So a man is on a business trip through Romania. He had missed the train and so had to take his car instead. His car was around 20 years old and was not really up to the trip, but needing to close a deal for his company, he was determined to make it there on time.

So he started to drive down the highway. He spent an hour or so on the freeway and things were going well but he saw ahead there was a large backup in traffic. Not knowing how long this jam would take he uses his phone's gps to find an alternate route.

He exits the freeway and starts down a long two lane road that began to wind through the mountains. After many miles he begins to question weather this was really the best road he could have taken, but the gps said that in another 30 miles he would re-join the highway, so he continued on.

As he was driving he encountered a very steep climb up through a mountain pass. As he reached the top he heard a loud bang and the vehicle shook violently. He coasted just enough to make it over the pass and start downhill. He stopped at the peak of the climb and opened up the hood and being not very mechanically inclined, he had no idea what was wrong.

He got back in the car and tried to start the car but it just would not start. So he decided to try and coast down the hill and see how far he could get, or possibly come across a petrol station.

He coasted down the hill for almost a full mile and as it flattened out, slowly the car rolled to a halt. Having seen nothing within the Last ten miles he decides to try and call a towing company to get his car, but his phone has no signal and is almost dead.

So having seen nothing in the last 20 miles, he decides to lock his car and continue on foot to see if he can find someone with a phone.

He continues on foot for several miles till he sees a small driveway which shows no signs of recent use. He decides it's worth a shot to go check this out. He walks down this driveway for at least half a mile before he finds a massive iron gate connected to a large stone wall on each side. As he approaches the gate, the gate creaks and squeaks and slowly opens inward.

A bit startled, he cautiously walks through the gate and continues down the path. He hears a noise behind him and he turns to see the gate slowly swing shut and close with a loud bang. The man jumps at the sound and decides this wasn't the best idea, so he runs quickly back to the gate, but it is shut and refuses to open.

He decides to continue on and go find the house on this property. He walks for another 5 minutes before seeing a massive mansion looming in front of him. The front doors must have been 20 feet tall, and there were hundreds of windows and it was 8 stories tall with a tower on the far right side of the house.

The man slowly walks up the massive stone steps and through the huge pillars and right up to the large wooden doors. He finds the courage to grab the massive lions head knocker and knock on the door. Supprisingly quickly a short man in a butlers uniform opens the door.

"can I help you?" asks the butler

"yes I was looking for a telephone. My car broke down and I don't have cell signal and..."

"follow me." said the butler, sternly cutting him off.

He follows the small butler into the largest foyer he has ever seen with rich thick red carpets on the floor and gigantic iron chandeliers hanging from a ceiling so high it reminded him of a Gothic cathedral he had seen many years ago in Italy.

The butler shows him the telephone and telephone book and leaves him to call the towing company. The towing company is quite busy and because of the distance to his car from any major town, they are not able to send a truck till the next morning.

"what did they say?" asked the butler.

"they can't send a truck till tomorrow. Is there a chance I could mayb..."

"Right this way, we have many guest bedrooms." says the butler cutting him off again.

He follows the butler down a long hallway lined with suits of armour and shields with different coats of arms.

"geez," says the man, chuckling to himself, "do you have talking teacups and a monster for a Master?"

The butler responded with silence as he continued to lead him through the mansion. Finally, after what seemed like ages, they reached a lavishly decorated bedroom with a large four post bedroom and a Supprisingly large and modern bathroom.

"we have a full buffet just down at the end of the hall to your right, but before anything else, I need to show you something."

The butler then takes him back to the main foyer. He walks up to a giant Fireplace. He pushes on a big stone on the corner of the hearth and the back wall of the fireplace slides away to reveal a passage. He walks down this passage turns a corner goes down a set of stairs around another corner, back up some stairs and through a large door with a big brass knob.

In the middle of the room was a big cage with a pink gorilla sitting in one corner.

"you must never touch the pink gorilla!" said the butler as he quickly turned and ushered the man back through the doorway, down the stairs, around the corner, up the stairs, around the corner, down the hallway and out the fireplace.

The butler then quickly walked away and disappeared through a door that then locked.

Not sure what to think, the man goes back to his room and takes a long shower. After his shower, he goes to bed and tries to sleep, but he can't stop thinking about the pink gorilla. Why would that butler even show him the gorilla? It's not like he would have found the cage by accident.

He eventually decides he wants to go take another look. not to touch, but just to look. He had been going over the image of that gorilla in his mind and he couldn't decide if what he saw was real or not.

So he crept out of his room and down to the foyer. The fireplace was closed and he knew he would have to push the secret rock, but he didn't want to alert the butler or anyone else in the house. He tries to carefully push the button, making as little noise as possi...

SHHHOOOK BAM!

He froze and looked around to see if the loud noise woke anyone. Luckily it seems that no one heard or cared and so he slowly entered through the fireplace and walked slowly down the hallway. He went around the corner at the end of the hallway, down the stairs, around the other corner, up the stairs and then slowly turned the big brass doorknob.

The door opened with a loud creak and revealed the large cage with the pink gorilla now sitting in a different corner. He slowly walked around the cage untill he was at a point where the gorilla was a mere arms length from the cage bars. The pink gorilla was sitting there snoring, sleeping like a baby. By this time, the man had decided he had to find out what would happen if he touched the gorilla. So he slowly reached in the cage and softly poked the gorilla in the arm. He stood there waiting for the gorilla to react but nothing happened. So he reached out and poked the gorilla a bit harder. This time the gorilla moved to scratch the spot he had touched.

The gorilla then awoke. Sniffing his arm he uttered a low guttural growl. The man quickly withdrew his arm and headed for the door. The gorilla then released a long loud cry and started going crazy at the bars of the cage. He started actually bending the bars, getting it close to where he could actually get out. Then he ripped one of the bard off and howled again. At this point, the man, terrified, started sprinting out the door. He ran as fast as he could, down the stairs, around the corner, up the stairs. As he reached the top step he could hear the gorilla starting down the stairs behind him. He ran even faster down the hallway and out the fireplace.

He frantically started mashing the secret stone to get the fireplace to close. And as if in slow motion the back began to slide back in place. It moved so slowly that the man wasn't sure it would close in time. As bit was half closed he saw the gorilla round the last corner. In a mad hope to get it to close faster he started mashing the button again but to no avail.

Just as the massive stone was about to close the gorilla puts his hand in the small Crack left open. He slowly started pulling the large stone wall back open. Terrified, the man ran out the front door and sprinted back down the driveway. He came to the iron gate and again it wouldn't open for him. So he began to climb.

He got to the top and as he climbed over he heard the gorilla's cry and being so startled he fell down on the other side of the gate tearing his new clothes in the process. He stumbled down the driveway towards the main road and as he looked back he saw the gorilla climbing up the gate.

Running as hard as he could he ran back to the main road and then back towards his car, the gorilla not far behind. He finally reaches his car exhausted, he tries to start his car but it just won't start. The gorilla running up to the car as he tries again to start the car. The gorilla roars and the man reaches over and pushes down the lock by his shoulder and tries again in vain to start the car.

The gorilla then starts to push and rock the car, violently shaking the car. He eventually rips off the driver side door. The gorilla then leans down and roars right in the man's cowering head, spewing phlegm all over his face and shoulders. The gorilla then reaches his arm into the car and pokes the man in the shoulder and says,

"you're it."
A cowboy walks into a deserted saloon... And there's no tinkling waltz on the piano, no gentle buzzing about the days activities, it's empty. A mournful bartender polishes an immaculate glass and halfheartedly waves away a fat, clueless fly.

The cowboy sidled into a stool and fished a coin out of his pocket. He flicked it with his thumb, and it sang in the air before ringing out on the wooden bar.

"Say friend, you got a whiskey?"

The coin rattles to a stop, and the bartender looks up with a patient smile.

"That is," says the cowboy, "if you're not too busy."

"No sir," says the barman. "Never too busy." He pops the top off a dark bottle of rye and pours a generous glass.

The cowboy throws it back, licks his lips, and says, "My, my, my. Doesn't do any good in the bottle, does it?"

"I suppose it doesn't," says the bartender.

The fly buzzes by.

"Well!" says the cowboy, clearly itching for company. "Where in the Sam Hell is everybody?"

"Oh," says the bartender, "they're all at the hangin'."

"Hangin'?

"Hangin'."

The cowboy motions for another belt of brown, and the bartender obliges.

"Now who might they be hangin' today?"

The bartender puts his rag on his shoulder, looks the cowboy straight in the eye and says, "Sir, today they're hangin' none other than 'Brown Paper Pete'."

"Brown Paper Pete?"

"The very same."

The cowboy points to the now empty glass and makes the international 'just one more' gesture.

"That's an interesting name, isn't it?"

"It does have an air about it, sir."

"Now why do you suppose they call him that?"

"Well sir," says the bartender, "they call him 'Brown Paper Pete' because he wears a brown paper hat."

"Does he now?"

"He does."

"And if it rains?"

"He wears it all the same."

"My goodness."

"That ain't the half of it, sir! See, he also wears himself a brown paper shirt."

"A shirt?"

"And a brown paper tie. Both of which are firmly ensconced in a well-fitted brown paper frock coat. Do you want me to tell you about his pants?"

"I think I have a pretty fair idea," says the cowboy. "Would it be presumptive of me to assume that they are made of brown paper as well?"

"They are indeed. And he has a nice pair of brown paper boots, and a fine set of brown paper socks."

"It appears," says the cowboy, "that this outlaw's sobriquet is well-earned!"

"Now I don't know what that specifically means, sir. But I'll wager I agree."

The cowboy sips in silence.

The fly makes another round.

The bartender goes back to polishing the gleaming glass.

"So!" says the cowboy. "What are they hangin' him for?"

The bartender puts down the glass, wipes a smudge from the bar, looks up at the cowboy and says,

"Rustlin'."
I have one advice to the people of /r/NoFap Go fuck yourself.
A man wakes up in a dingy slum with no memory of how he got there. He wanders around aimlessly before he finds even one person who will talk to him. Some ratty beggar on the street turns out to be nice enough to explain where he is.

"You're in the afterlife!" he tells the man, "But you must have been a real shithead when you were alive, because this is the fourth ring, and only the worst people come here."

All of a sudden, a siren goes off, one of those air-raid things. The man is terrified but the beggar gets up calmly and leads him to a big, dilapidated warehouse where thousands of other similarly unkempt souls are gathering. When the man asks why they're all here, the beggar points to a line of folding tables against the wall. Each table has some moldy bread, cups of dingy water, and some bowls of broth so thin they could have just run out of cups. Only then does the man realize how hungry he is. A guard in heavy body armor blows a whistle and all the people arrange themselves into three lines.

The beggar is helpful enough to explain them for the man. "That one's the bread line, that's the broth line, and that's the water line. All the food here is free, but if you want to get out of this maggot hole, you've got to work, because the gate guards into the third ring ask five hundred dollars to get through. I've heard the food is better there."

So the man gets his food. It's abominable, and right then and there, he vows to make five hundred dollars and get into the third ring. Unfortunately for him, very few people need work in the afterlife, especially when all of them are saving up to emigrate. Even still, after ten years of hard work, eating the moldy bread and indistinguishable soup and water, he finally saves up enough money. The guards let him through and he finds himself in the third ring. It's nothing too fancy, if anything, it's a bit below average for a real city, but to his eyes it is paradise. All the guards look much friendlier, and the houses and buildings, while not spacious or lavish, are at least up to code. And to his surprise, he runs right into a familiar former beggar as he crosses the street.

"What are the odds?" they both ask and they get to conversing. The beggar, it turns out, only managed to make it in himself a few months back. Their conversation is interrupted, however, by what sounds like a school bell. When the man seems confused, the beggar leads him to what looks like a giant gymnasium. Here, people are gathering once again, and the man begins to understand. On a line of folding tables against one wall are stacks of hot dogs, big bowls of salad, and solo cups full of fresh lemonade. A cop shouts for everyone's attention and directs them all to stand in three lines. The beggar smiles at the man's wonder and points to each line in turn. "That's the hot dog line, that's the salad line, and that's the lemonade line." The man gets in each line in turn and gets himself his lunch.

While he's eating, basking in joy at not being stuck with old bread and water, the beggar encourages him, "The best part is, halfway through the year, they switch from hot dogs, salad, and lemonade to chicken, chili, and hot chocolate. You can never get tired of it!"

Sadly, this proved not to be true. After only a few days, the man did again get tired of the same meal every day. But he knew firsthand that he could change his lot, so one day he went up to the wall of the second circle. This time the guards were asking for ten thousand dollars. Well, the man didn't like it, but he figured he had his whole afterlife ahead of him now that he was out of the fourth circle, and he could certainly take some time to save up. After ten years of hard work, it wasn't too difficult for him to keep up the work ethic, and only twenty years later, he went back to the guards of the second ring with the money in hand. He went through the gate and found himself in a glittering, clean city full of glass and steel.

And wouldn't you know it, but there, standing across the street was the same beggar, only now he was wearing a well-fitted suit. The man greeted the beggar as an old friend and they started talking again. Once again, their conversation was interrupted, only this time it was by beautiful church bells. "Come," the beggar told him, "I'll take you to the evening meal." So the man followed and they entered a glamorous ballroom filled with beautiful attendees. Even the cops here looked good, dressed in suits and sunglasses like bodyguards. And sure enough, piled onto platters on huge mahogany tables against the far wall were plates of steak, bowls of the most delicious seafood soups, and glasses of champagne. One of the bodyguards cleared his throat loudly and politely requested that the attendees line up. Three lines were formed and the beggar pointed each line out in turn. "That's the steak line, that's the soup line, and that's the champagne line," and then he added, "and apparently here, they change the meals FOUR times a year!"

The man rejoiced, ate, and was happy, and for once felt that nothing was lacking. Four changes a year was enough for him. But one day, out of curiosity, he went up to the bodyguards that guarded the gate into the first and final ring of the afterlife and found they were asking for a million dollars to pass. Well the man was a bit disturbed by this, after all, the second ring seemed perfect to him. "What is it," he thought, "that could possibly be more wonderful than what I have here?" That question haunted him for weeks until he came to a conclusion. He was used to working hard and he had all of eternity to save up, so he wanted, just once to see what he could possibly be missing in the first ring.

Fifty years later, he returned to the guards with a million dollars. When he stepped into the first ring he fell to his knees. The architecture was glorious and inhuman, and the bodyguard had turned into shining angels. To his surprise, someone helped him up off the street and when he looked, he realized he recognized who it was--it was the beggar he met in the fourth ring, adorned in a golden robe and glowing, and when he looked down at himself he realized he looked much the same.

The beggar laughed jovially. "I got here only three years ago myself, but somehow I knew you would be right here behind me. I've come back to this gate every day waiting for you to make it in!" Suddenly, the air was filled with the sound of angelic choirs and the beggar led the man off to a gigantic palace made of crystal and cloud. The room was filled with radiant citizens of the first circle and angels prepared everything. Sure enough, there was a line of massive altars against one wall, spilling over with glistening golden dragon meat, a pudding refined from clouds and dew and silk, and an ice cold tub of ambrosia and nectar ladled out individually into blindingly beautiful crystalline chalices. An angel fluttered from the ceiling and bowed silently to the assembled mass, who bowed respectfully back and then broke themselves into their lines on their own.

Smiling at the tradition, the beggar pointed to the first line. "That's the line for the dragon meat," he said before turning to the next line, "and that's the line for angeldust stew," then he paused, confused.

"What is it?" the man asked his old friend.

The beggar replied, "There appears to be no punchline."

EDIT: if you liked this joke, go to r/feghoot for more like this one!

EDIT 2: To people screaming repost, i gave credit to  u/insolent_swine in the comments. I just did it here, too.
The old man, the prince, and the fish. Once upon a time, there was a prince of a certain land, who wanted to be a lowly fisherman when he grew up. But try as he could, he couldn't ever catch a single fish. He had tried many methods, including nets, spears, and traps, but all to no avail.

Furthermore, he was looked down upon by the rest of his family. While he should have been heir to the throne, he spent so much time trying to fish and failing that he was unsuited to the position. Furthermore, he had hardly wanted to become king anyway, and saw no real need for him to fill the position. Eventually, his family disowned him and he had to live his own life in a small hut.

One day, he met an old man by the lake shore, who was hungry and begging. The prince was down to his last few coins in his purse, but he gave them to the old man anyway. Not entirely out of altruism, mind you. He simply thought the old man would be able to have more use with the money than he would, considering what a failure he was at fishing.

The old man looked up at him and smiled, asking him "I see you have a fishing net. Would you like to learn the secret to fishing?"

The prince, obviously just having given away absolutely everything, had little choice but to agree. So obviously, he did.

The old man told him, "Come closer."

The prince did so.

The old man whispered in his ear, "Beyond the desert to the east is a huge ocean where the water is sweet and bubbling. Many fish swim in it, for there are plenty of nutrients in the water. You will surely get some fish there."

The prince said, "I understand," and started to set off.

The old man called after him, "Wait, you'll need this!" and gave the prince a fishing pole.

"This fishing pole is enchanted. It will draw fish towards it. You'll see."

The prince scrounged up what he could for the journey. He took the last of the bread he had, some water from the lake, and left his hut abandoned.

He started crossing the desert. The blistering heat beat down on him. Halfway through the desert, he noticed someone was following him. He turned towards them and asked if they had brought any water with them.

"Yes, but you haven't kept up your interest payments. Pay me and I'll throw in the water as a free bonus. Otherwise, I guess you won't be needing your left hand."

True to the old man's word, the fishing rod had indeed attracted a loan-shark (though the prince didn't realize this at the time). Not wanting to be killed or tortured or whatnot, the prince quickly thought up a plan.

"Yes, it's right here," he said, rummaging through his bag.

He took out the stale bread, which had hardened to a brick, and threw it at the shark, stunning him for a moment.

He turned and fled, running through the desert. His throat was parching, and every step he took against the slippery sands seemed to resist him all the way. Meanwhile, the loan-shark was calmly walking towards him.

Somehow, the prince managed to outrun the loan-shark. He made it to the edge of the bubbling ocean, as the old man had predicted. There, he saw a boat with some fishing supplies in them. He climbed in and started to figure out how to use the fishing rod.

True to the old man's word, the moment he cast his hook into the bubbling, fizzy waters, strange fish did indeed start biting almost immediately. He ended pulling fish after fish after hefty fish into his boat; so much so that he almost capsized. But in the end, he rowed back to shore, and thought that he should set up his home here.

He built a fire, cooked one of the fish, and took a bite out of it.

It was the most delicious thing he had ever tasted.

Several months passed, and the prince was able to live a happy life. Many travellers who passed by enjoyed his fish and paid a high price for it. So much so, that he eventually started up a trading company specializing in the fish. Then people wanted to be employed, so he had to build houses for them too. The prince's company soon turned into a town, into a city, and he had almost supreme authority.

One day, however, the aforementioned loan-shark arrived at the new palace. He was shown the way to the prince (who was basically now king but didn't realize it), and said "Now that you're king, you can pay me all that money you owed! Remember, of course that the rate was normally 8% per month, but since you're a king, it's 8% per day!"

The prince, realizing what had happened, fell to his knees and cried:

"Is this the reel life? Is this just Fanta sea?
Caught in sand, lied; no escape from regality"
A World Wide Survey.... A worldwide survey was conducted by the UN. The only question asked was: "Would you please give your honest opinion about solutions to the food shortage in the rest of the world?" The survey was a huge failure. In Africa they didn't know what "food" meant. In Eastern Europe they didn't know what "honest" meant. In Western Europe they didn't know what "shortage" meant. In China they didn't know what "opinion" meant. In the Middle East they didn't know what "solution" meant. In South America they didn't know what "please" meant. And in the USA they didn't know what "the rest of the world" meant.
The programmer and the train A programmer and his boss are traveling by train on a business trip, and not having any other place to sit, find a booth with a pretty young lady and presumably her mother sitting across from them.

The train enters a dark tunnel and two sounds ring clearly in the dark: one being the sound of a kiss and second being an unmistakable slap across the face.

As the train exits the tunnel, the following thoughts entered the minds of the four passengers:

Boss: "I never figured my employee to be so brash to kiss someone on the train like that.  Not that I care much, except I wish the the young lady hadn't accidentally slapped me instead of him."

Young lady: "Wow, I hardly expected to be kissed like that, though I wish my mother hadn't overreacted like that."

Mother: "How rude of that young man to kiss my daughter, though she didn't have *slap* the poor soul..."

Programmer: "It's not every day that one can slap his boss and kiss a pretty young lady.  Life is good."
What would Reddit do for a Klondike bar? OP's mom.
I need to stop making autism jokes But the repetition is just too soothing
Did you hear about the girl that was dating an Eskimo? She broke it off. 
Moses doesn't mind period sex. He's used to being in the red sea.
2 original jokes Here's 2 (bad) jokes I made up a few years ago. With all the reposts on here some new ones might be nice even if they are bad!

1. What do you call a long snake-like poo? A Poothon 

2. A family of poothons were floating down a river.

The son poothon asks his mother "dad told me that we're just a by-product of the human digestive system, is that true?"

The mother replies "don't listen to him, he's just talking shit!"
Yesterday I killed a pair of pigeons with an unmanned flying device. You could say I killed two birds with one drone!
Did you hear that Gregor Mendel never finished any of his work? That's right!

No punnett ended
What is the year of good eyesight? The Year 2020
Why are seagulls called seagulls? Because, if they flew over the bay, they would be called bagels.
What type of joke is the best joke? A Communist joke, because everyone gets it.
What do you call a dual stand up act on their periods? comoody
Dad what does it feel like having an awesome son? Me: Dad what does it feel like having an awesome son?

Dad: I dont know ask your grandpa 


Edit: Can't believe i got 1000 upvotes , Thanks Dad




What's the fastest food in the world? Scone
My dad always told me he never made the same mistake twice Must be why I'm an only child

Edit: First time on front page thanks guys!
A priest had a speaking parrot One night when the priest went on vacation a burglar broke into his house. Trying to be as sneaky as possible he didn't used his flashlight. Suddenly he heard a voice say:" Jesus sees you!" He quickly turned on his flashlight and looked around. When he saw the parrot the parrot again said:" Jesus sees you!" The burglar asked the parrot:" Who are you little Buddy?" The parrot answered:" I'm Josef." The burglar laughed:" What idiot names his parrot Josef?" The parrot answered:" The same Idiot who named his pitbull Jesus."
The CIA, GIGN and KGB...... are all trying to prove they are the best at catching criminals. The Secretary General of the UN decides to set them a test. He releases a rabbit into a forest, and each of them has to catch it. 

The CIA people go in. They place animal informants throughout the forest. They question all plant and mineral witnesses. After three months of extensive investigations, they conclude that the rabbit does not exist. 

The GIGN goes in. After two weeks with no leads they burn the forest, killing everything in it, including the rabbit, and make no apologies: the rabbit had it coming.

 The KGB goes in. They come out two hours later with a badly beaten bear. The bear is yelling: “Okay! Okay! I’m a rabbit! I’m a rabbit!”
A guy wanted a bigger dick.. A guy wanted a bigger dick and so he look around online for ways to get one. After a few hours of vigorous "searching", he found one. A guru that lived at the top of a mountain. So, excited at the chance of getting a big-ass dick, he set out. When he reached the base of the mountain, he saw a river that seemed to lead to the top, so he followed it. After reaching what seemed like the halfway point, he came across 2 gigantic rocks. They were blocking the path of the river. Determined to get a big one, he searched around for ways to get to the top, which he found in the form of a conveniently placed rope that went up to a cave. He climbed it and reached a shrine. Next to the shrine was a guru, meditating. He asked the guru," I heard you know how to get a bigger dick"                                  
 "Drink from the bottle beside the idol."    The guy drunk from it. Immediately, his dick got 7 inches bigger and his nuts became the size of a grapefruit. He, shocked, asked the guru," If you know this technique, why cant I see a bulge in your dhoti?" "The rope you climbed, that was my dick, and those rock, they were mine" 
Why shouldn't the number 288 ever be said in public? Because it's too gross
I like going for a jog at night The fear of getting murdered really helps my stamina.
Officer: Soldier, do you have change for a dollar? Soldier: Sure, buddy.

Officer: That's no way to address an officer! Now let's try it again. Do you have change for a dollar?

Soldier: No, SIR!
They say you can’t get a decent job without education. But look at Albert Einstein – he was a drop-out and still ended up being the first man on the moon!
Know why Mexico doesn't have a good Olympic team? Anybody that can run, jump, or swim is already in the U.S.
Two hunters were out in the woods Two hunters are out in the woods when one of them collapses. He's not breathing and his eyes are glazed, so his friend calls 911. "My friend is dead! What should I do?" The operator replies, "Calm down, sir. I can help. First make sure that he's dead." There's a silence, then a loud bang. Back on the phone, the guy says, "Ok, now what?"
What's the difference between a co-pilot and a duck? The duck can fly.


EDIT: this is a pilot joke - I obviously know that co-pilots can fly 
You must be calcium You make my bone hard.
What do Pizzas & parents have in common? If they're black, you have nothing to eat.
Two Men walk into a bar... The third one ducked.
What do you call a disagreeable Russian Sasquatch? A Nyeti.
Caught my wife receiving oral sex from our refrigerator again. I'll never buy another Kelvinator
Despair. What a Jamaican gets when he's bowling. 
What do you call a colour doing a chemistry degree? Cyantific. 
Sherlock and Watson were walking through an orchard... As they walk Watson keeps asking Sherlock to identify the trees they are seeing. After some time they approach a clearing and in the centre is a lone tree. 
Watson asks "Sherlock what is that tree with yellow skinned fruit?"
Sherlock smiles and replies "That's a lemon tree, my dear Watson"
A diplomat walks into a bar... A diplomat walks into a bar, orders a beer and sits next to another patron. They get to talking and the topic of careers comes up.

"I'm a government official" says the diplomat.  "I travel the world,  negotiating trade deals and brokering peace agreements.  It's an amazing job."

"Shit" says the other patron,  "I'm just an electrician, I'm nowhere near that important!"  
 
"Not at all" the diplomat replied. "We both must stay informed on the same matters. You sound like you're just as plugged in to current affairs."
I got frostbite and had part of my foot amputated. Then my girlfriend left me. She was lack-toes intolerant.
Can someone get me a new calendar? Mayan ended 
An interview with the best racer in the world Reporter: So, how do you do it? How do you keep winning?     
Racer: Winning?     
Reporter: Yeah, you have been undefeated since day one.     
Racer: I've invented a new way of winning a race, it's about coming through the finish line last. So far everyone else have been better at it than me.
A teacher reminds her class for tomorrow's exam A teacher reminds her class of the yearly test tomorrow. 

"And remember class, there is no excuse for missing the test tomorrow, not a hurricane, not a funeral, not a nuclear attack, nothing!"

Little Johnny in the corner then pipes up and says

"What would happen if I came into class suffering from complete and utter sexual exhaustion?

The whole class bursts into laughter. The teacher walks up to Johnny and smiles and says

"I'd guess you'd have to write the test left-handed."

A lion, a witch, and a Wardrobe apparate into a bar The bartender calls out, "Hey, no secret identities in this bar!" So the lion transforms into a bright light, the witch dons a pantsuit, and a man steps out of the closet. The bartender is aghast, almost on the verge of tears. 

"Oh my lord. I never thought I'd meet God, Hillary Clinton, and Drake in the same day!"
How often do guinea pigs have sex? Once a wheek wheek wheek wheek!
Why does the man with fake hair never carry around his wallet? Because he never expects to toupee anything
I hate gravity... It's always putting me down
Lauren was lying in bed One night when she felt her husband's hand caressing her neck in a way she hadn't experienced in quite a while. Then it slid down her side, stopping at her knee, which was as far as her husband could reach. Then he moved close and did the same on her other side before abruptly stopping and moving away. 
Delighted by this unexpected attention, Lauren whispered, "Honey, that was wonderful. Why did you stop?"
He answered, ''I found the remote."
What was the last thing to cross Paul Walker's mind? The windshield
There was a church that had a bell that no one could ring There was a church that had a bell that no one could ring. One day, a boy came and asked the priest if he could try. He went up into the tower and ran straight into the bell face-first. The bell tolled loud and clear. The priest gave him the job.


One Sunday, the boy ran straight toward the bell with his face and missed, so he fell off the tower and died.


"Congregation," the priest said before the assembled masses. "Does anybody know this boy's name? I don't know him, but his face rings a bell."
How does an angry Mexican season his food? ...With a pinche salt
A pair of jumper cables walk into a bar The bartender says "I'll serve you, but you better not start anything"
Can’t believe how much my girlfriend is crying about her new haircut Its much worse for me, I’m the one who’s gonna have to find a new girlfriend now.
What's the difference between oranges and babies? I don't fuck the oranges after I skin them.
Why did the blind man cross the street ? At least he tried ......
What do you call a Chinese person with a video camera? Phil Ming
2 flies on a terd 1 fly farts and the other says 'do you mind I'm eating'
Before leaving, my mother asked me, "How long will you be travelling through Scandanavia?" I replied, "Until I'm Finnished."
Gay dating is hard when you only like pessimists. I'm not interested in positive men.
what do you call gangster spaghetti spaghetto
What do you call a magic dog? A labracadabrador
A three-legged dog walks into a saloon in the Old West   A three-legged dog walks into a saloon in the Old West. He slides up to the bar and announces: ''I'm looking for the man who shot my paw.'' 
Why can't Google maps hold down a solid relationship Because it's always looking for the quickest possible route
What do a pizza delivery driver and a gynecologist have in common? They both have to smell it but neither of them gets to eat it. :(
A man with no hands walks into a palm reader's business The palm reader looks at him and says, "well, I'm stumped." 
What do you call a white bear that can't push? A polar bear.
What did the man ask the Jamaican Chef? "What Jamaican?"
If I had a dollar for every time a woman didn't show interest in me They'd probably eventually show interest in me
Two elephants were watching a naked man... One elephant turned and asked the other, "How the hell does he eat with that thing!"
Trump said "I am going to drain the swamp and take on the establishment"
Trailer Park Rules 1. No cars up on blocks for longer than three weeks. 

2. No changing your oil in the street. 

3. No loud and wild parties without inviting the manager. 

4. You may have no more than 3 beer can wind chimes each only having no more than 6 cans each. 

5. Drunkenness will not be tolerated in the streets prior to 10 am. 

6. While outside of your trailer you must be at least partially clothed.* 

7. If you prefer to clean your trailer in the nude, please close the curtains. * 

8. When bringing in the Jerry Springer or COPS film crews, please provide the management prior written notice so that certain residents may be forewarned. 

9. Empty beer bottles should not be discarded on the front lawn. However, they may remain there until you are sober enough to collect them with the understanding you will collect them within 7 days whether sober or not. 

10. When bringing dates home to your trailer, please be advised that in the event the sidewalks need to be repaired or replaced due to the weight of your date, you will be responsible for all cost incurred. 

Note* (Exemptions to rules 6 & 7 may be provided to women between the ages of 18 and 35. Please submit a photograph to the manager for approval.) 

Following these simple rules should make your stay in our trailer park more enjoyable for everyone. 
In a small town in Tennessee, Big Bubba decides it's time for his son, 18 year old Billy Bob, to learn the facts of life.  He takes him to the local house of ill repute, which is fronted by a beauty parlor. 

Bubba introduces Billy Bob to the madam, and explains that it's time for his indoctrination to sex." 

The madam says, "Bubba you've been such a good customer over the years, I'm going to see to your son personally." 

So the madam takes Billy Bob by the hand and leads him upstairs, where she completes his deflowering. 

Later, as they are walking downstairs the madam says, "Since this is your first time, I'm going to see that you get the full treatment before you leave, I'm going to give you a manicure too." 

Two weeks later Bubba and Billy Bob run into the madam on the town's main street. 

Billy Bob is acting a little shy, so the madam smiles and says, "Well, Billy Bob, don't you remember me?" 

"Yes ma'am the boy stammers, "You're the lady that gave me the crabs and then cut off my fingernails so I couldn't scratch 'em." 
A football coach of an all Redneck team walked into the locker room before a game,...  looked over to his star player and said, "I'm not supposed to let you play since you failed math, but we need you in there. So what I have to do is ask you a math question, and if you get it right, you can play." 

The player agreed, and the coach looked into his eyes intently and asks, "Okay, now concentrate... what is two plus two?" 

The player thought for a moment and then he answered, "Four?" 

"Four?!?" the coach exclaimed, excited that he got it right. 

At that, all the other players on the team began screaming, "Come on coach, give him another chance!"
Old guy buys a new sports car..... And right after he leaves the salesroom, he floors the gas pedal making him zip in the road. He notices that a police car, with it's siren blaring so he really puts the pedal to the max. While in hot pursuit, he realizes that he's too old for this. So he pulls over, waiting for the cop to catch up to him. The cop finally approaches him, and tells him "Sir, my shift ends in 10 minutes. It's C Christmas. If you can give me a good reason that you did this, i'll let you go." The man explained that his wife, many years ago she ran off for a policeman. i thought you were bringing her back. "Have a good day sir" Said the cop.
My favourite job has always been giving stupid people advice. Hello! You clicked! What do you want to know?
Who's Going to Pay For the Wall? Mexico
Mexic
Mexi
Mex
Me


A driver is pulled over by a policeman.... The policeman approaches the drivers door.

"Is there a problem, Officer?"

The policeman says, "Sir, you were speeding. Can I see your license please?"

The driver responds, "I'd give it to you but I don't have one."

"You don't have one?"

The man responds, "I lost it four times for drink driving."

The policeman is shocked. "I see. Can I see your vehicle registration papers please?"

"I'm sorry, I can't do that."

The policeman says, "Why not?"

"I stole this car."

The officer says, "Stole it?"

The man says, "Yes, and I killed the owner."

At this point the officer is getting irate. "You what?"

"She's in the boot if you want to see."

The Officer looks at the man and slowly backs away to his car and calls for back up. Within minutes, five police cars show up, surrounding the car. A senior officer slowly approaches the car, clasping his half-drawn gun.

The senior officer says, "Sir, could you step out of your vehicle please!"

The man steps out of his vehicle. "Is there a problem, sir?"

"One of my officers told me that you have stolen this car and murdered the owner."

"Murdered the owner?"

The officer responds, "Yes, could you please open the boot of your car please?"

The man opens the boot, revealing nothing but an empty boot.

The officer says, "Is this your car sir?"

The man says, "Yes" and hands over the registration papers.

The officer, understandably, is quite stunned. "One of my officers claims that you do not have a driving licence."

The man digs in his pocket revealing a wallet and hands it to the officer. The officer opens the wallet and examines the licence. He looks quite puzzled. "Thank you, sir. One of my officers told me you didn't have a licence, stole this car, and murdered the owner."

The man replies, "I bet you the lying bastard told you I was speeding, too!"
Went for a walk with the missus last night... There's a beautiful spot on top of the hill not so far from here, on the way whilst walking down a quiet path she turned to me and said, "Give it to me, give it to me, I'm wet".

I stopped for a second and looked around, and then it dawned upon me "No fuck off, it's my umbrella".
What's the difference between a blonde and a mosquito? A mosquito will stop sucking after you slap it.
If two people having sex is called a twosome..... Then now i know why they call you handsome ;)
A man looking for his wife... The man approached the very beautiful woman in the large supermarket and asked,

“You know, I’ve lost my wife here in the supermarket. Can you talk to me for a couple of minutes?”

“Why?”

“Because every time I talk to a beautiful woman my wife appears out of nowhere.”

President Trump's choice for Supreme Court Justice is strongly opposed to euthanasia. I wonder what he's got against kids in the Orient?
So this guy works at a pickle factory... Every day, he comes home after work and tells his wife about his day. One day, he comes home and tells her he has a very dark fantasy. He says, 

"I want to put my dick in the pickle slicer." 

His wife is shocked, and encourages him not to do it, but the next day the man comes home with a sick grin on his face. His wife says, 

"Please tell me you didn't do it!" 

The man keeps grinning. His wife takes off his pants to assess the damage, but everything is as it should be. The wife is confused. 

The man keeps grinning. He says, 

"I did it, I put my dick in the pickle slicer, and she wants to do it again this weekend." 
What should you put on the tomb stone of a mathematician? He didn't count on this...
A man went into a bar and sat infront of a bowl of pretzels... "You have some very nice clothes" said the bowl of pretzels.

The man thinking he was hallucinating, ignored the bowl and called the waiter and ordered a margarita.

"Nice choice good sir" said the bowl of pretzels.

The man once again thinking he was hallucinating ignored the bowl of pretzels.

On recieving his drink he gave the waiter a dollar as thanks.

"You are quite generous my good sir" said the bowl of pretzels.

The man startled called the waiter, "I thought I was hallucinating, but that bowl of pretzels infringement of me is complimenting me" said the man to the waiter.

The waiter nodded before saying, "Don't worry sir, the bowl of pretzels are complimentary!"
A handful of foreign-exchange students are in the classroom ... and they were asked their opinion on food scarcity in other countries.   The discussion was a complete disaster.  The Somali kids didn't know the English word "food", the British kids didn't know what "scarcity" meant, the American kids didn't know what "other countries" were, and the Chinese students asked what "their opinion" should be.

Source: Not mine, I just hadn't seen this one on /r/jokes at least in a while.  Can haz less-stale repost?
Bad taste Did you hear Donald Trump is putting a ban on telecommunications from the middle east! 


It's called the Teleban.
Someone asked what my favorite band was... if I'm being subjective, I'd say The Who.

if I'm being objective, I'd say The Whom.
Sally can't sell seashells down by the seashore anymore... She was busted for conch-traband.
I heard Michael J. Fox is getting his own cooking show... The show is called, "Shake and Bake".
What do you call Batman when he skips out on church? Christian Bale
On His Deathbed  On his deathbed, a lifelong Republican supporter suddenly announced that he was switching to the Democrats. “I can’t believe you’re doing this.” said his friend. “For your entire life you’re been a staunch Republican. Why would you want to become a Democrat now?” “Because I’d rather it was one of them that dies than one of us.”
What's the difference between a man and a government bond? The bond matures!
A man was about to give an awareness speech on STD's.. A man was about to give an awareness speech on STD's (sexually transmitted diseases) when he realized that there were some kids in the audience so he had to speak metaphorically.

He started by saying, "everyone should only drink from their wells"... and continued until the end of the speech when an old man asked the question, "what if I don'have a well?". Before the speaker could answer, the old man's grandson said, "you can drink from your own tap grandpa".
My doctor told me I need fewer trans fats in my life... Looks like it's time to delete Tumblr.
A black man goes inside a bus full of Koreans Everybody is talking and the only word he can make out is the word 'nigga'. The black man looks around and sees that he's the only black person on the bus. He starts to get visibly upset and then a passenger who happened to speak english and could see why he was upset spoke up. 

"Excuse me, I see you are upset but there is no reason to be. Because you see, in Korean, the word 'nigga' means 'you'. 
New president of a country is handed 3 envelopes by the previous leader. President of a country is handed 3 numbered envelopes by the previous leader.  Previous leader says "If you screw anything up, then open one of the envelopes and it will tell you what to do."

Eventually, over time, the president screws some things up.  Everyone gets mad at him and threatens to impeach him.  So he opens the Envelope #1.  It says "Blame everything on me, your predecessor."

So he does that and eventually is forgiven. 

But then, as time goes on, the president screws up again.   He doesn't know what to do.  So he opens up Envelope #2.  It says "Blame everything on me again."  So, in time, the people forgive him again. 

But then, as time goes on, the president screws things up yet a 3rd time.  He doesn't know what to do.  Relieved that he still has one envelope left, he opens it up.  It says "Prepare 3 envelopes."

What could US Senate learn from Trump's wives? A two-thirds' majority decided to ditch him.
How do you fuck 118 million Americans with one dick? Elect him president

edit: 318 million, not 118
My Friend Recently has been attaching balloons to everything he sees. I mean seriously, you can't make this stuff up.
I'm furious! racist tech support just called me asian All I said was my drivers keep crashing 
Did you hear about the German man who was up to no good? I heard he has a severe guten allergy.
A man walks up to his friend and says, "I'm getting sick of being single." The friend replies "well there's a lot of sea in the fish.... and that sea is full of men."
[NSFW] I'm so sad, my favorite dating site is shutting down Disney has announced they are shutting down Club Penguin. =(
What do you call a sick painting? An Ill-ustration.
MOM! I'm being called gay in school. Who is calling you that son?

A bunch of cute boys.
What do you call a werewolf that doesn't know he's a werewolf? An unawarewolf.
The doctor's jar There was an old man who was worried something was wrong with his penis. He decided to go to the doctor to get a diagnosis.

After some x-rays and checkups, the doctor got results.

"Looks like you have a testicle infection. I need further data, so I need you to masturbate into this jar so I can get a sample of your semen." the doctor says, handing the old man a mason jar with a lid closed tightly on it. "Come back the next day with what I asked for."

The next day, the old man comes back to the doctor with the jar.

"Wha? Old man, this jar has nothing in it!" the doctor said, frustrated.

The old man smiled sheepishly. "I tried everything," he says. "First, I tried by myself; I couldn't do it. Then, I asked my wife, she couldn't do it either. So, I asked my neighbor to try, but he couldn't do it either."

The doctor's eyes widened. "Hold on, you asked your neighbor?"

The old man sighed. "Yep, we just couldn't get that jar open."
What are Steve Bannon's favorite flowers? Gin blossoms.
What has 8 wheels and flies? A garbage truck. 
A cop is walking down the street and notices A cop is walking down the street and notices a young blonde woman down on her knees under a streetlight. “Can I help you?” he asked.

The blonde woman replied, “I dropped my diamond ring and I’m looking for it.”

The cop asked, “Did you drop it right here?”

“No,” responded the blonde, “I dropped it about a block away, but the light’s better here.”
I like my apples how I like my clown hookers: Red, yellow, green and devoid of worms.
How do you get a nun pregnant? Dress her up as an altar boy.
I beat Anorexia today People keep coming up with weirder names for their children.
Bad kids  This lady has two little sons that curse all the time.  She can't  get them to stop using foul language. She tries time outs, extra chores and taking away their toys but nothing works.
    One day she finally gives up and decides that she's just gonna smack them the next time one of them says a dirty word.  So the next morning the kids come running down the stairs for breakfast and she asks the first little boy what he would like to eat.
   He says, "Give me some fucking eggs!"
BOOM!  She smacks him right across the face, then politely asks the other little boy what he would like for breakfast.
    He says,  "I don't want any fucking eggs!"
Three old men Three elderly men were at the doctor for a memory test. The doctor asked the first man, "What is three times three?" "274," was his reply.
The doctor said to the second man, "It's your turn. What is three times three?" "Tuesday", he replied.

Then the doctor asked the third man, "Okay, your turn. What's three times three"? "Nine", he answered. "That's great!" said the doctor. "How did you get that answer?”

"Easy," said the third man. "I subtracted 274 from Tuesday."
Do you spell it Palindrome or Palendrome? Cause I've heard it both ways.
George Bush and his competitor got into a fist fight... I got to say, it was Al Gore...
What hangs at a mans thigh... What hangs at a mans thigh, and wants to poke a hole, that it's poked many times before? 


A key
A priest and a man were golfing A man named Joe was golfing with his friend who was a priest. On the first hole, Joe misses a relatively easy putt and exclaims "Fuck! I missed!" The priest tells him to please watch his language and they continue playing.

A few holes later, Joe misses another easy putt, putting him behind the priest. He again exclaims "Fuck! I missed again!" And once again the priest  tells him to not use that language. Joe apologizes and they keep playing.

A few holes later the same thing happens. The priest says, "if you use that type of language again, may a bolt of lightning strike you where you stand." Joe once again apologizes.

On the last hole, the men are tied. The priest makes par. Joe has landed the ball two feet from the hole and if he makes the putt, he will win the game. He lines up the putt, and once again missed. He gets so mad and screams "Fuck! I missed AGAIN!" At that moment, lightning strikes the priest, who collapses and dies.

High above, the clouds open up and a great booming voice proclaims "well fuck. I missed."
Once there was a little boy in church.  
He had to go to the bathroom so he told his mother, "Mommy, I have to piss."
The mother said, "Son don't say piss in church. Next time you have to piss, say, 'whisper' because it is more polite."
The next Sunday, the litle boy was sitting by his father this time, and once again, he had to go to the bathroom.
He told his father, "Daddy I have to whisper."
The father said, "OK. Here, whisper in my ear."
My landscaper is also a paramedic He told me he makes more money mowing my lawn than he would finding me on my lawn having a heart attack. 


What is the most controversial topic in the pirate world? Aarghbortion
What did two oceans say to each other? Nothing, they just waved.
My wife hates it when I'm on the toilet She says it brings out the worst in me
A blonde, brunette, and a redhead are all in the 9th Grade. Which one is the sexiest? The blonde, because she's the only one who's 18.
A wife is yelling at her husband. "Get out of the house! I hate you, I want a divorce! Get out!"  
As he walks out the door she screams: "I hope you die a slow and painful death!"  
The guy says: "So hang on a minute, now you want me to stay?"
What do Reddit and elections in third world countries have in common? They both have a reasonable voting cutoff of six months
Presidential politics is a lot like comedy. 
In the early days you’re going to bomb.
What do you call A anorexic girl with a yeast infection?

A quarter pounder with cheese. 
What do you call something that has a small hole, is tasty, and covered in my cum? A glazed donut.
If you think that move is going to work, you've got another thing coming. And it won't be me! 
America has a bad case of priapism... An elect dick that lasts for at least four years.
TIL: Many medieval surnames like Fletcher or Cooper refer to the patriarch's traditional occupation. I guess I won't be marrying Mr. Dickinson.
Why were the twin towers sad? Because they ordered pepperoni pizza and got plane.
Sex is like homework I only do it when my teacher forces me to.
A new student at school enters the classroom... As the class gets settled in, the teacher asks the new student to introduce himself to the other students. 

"Hello, my name is Buttitches, nice to meet you all." 

Giggles are heard amongst the other students. The teacher, clearly unamused, asks the student again, what his name is. He repeats, "Buttitches." The teacher then tells the student she will not deal with such inappropriate behavior and sends him to the principal's office. Upon his arrival, the principal, unfamiliar with the new student, asks for his name.

The student responds, "My name is Buttitches." 

The principal, an old stern man, does not take kindly to class clowns. He asks the student again what his name is under the threat that if he lies, he will be sent home for the day for inappropriate behavior. 

The student responds, "I am Buttitches, sir." 

The principal is angered and, in a flurry, calls the boys mother and explains he is suspended for the day for disrupting the classroom and lying. The principal gets off the phone with the mother, she told him that she would pick up her son across the street from the school. 

The boys mother arrives. As the boy is crossing the street he is hit by a car. His mother immediately gets out of her car and rushes over, screaming, "Buttitches, oh, Buttitches. My poor Buttitches!"

A man walking on he sidewalk at the time stops to look at the woman and yells, "Then scratch it lady!"
What to do you call someone that doesn't eat meat OR vegetables? Dead
Do you know what Disney song is really deep? Under The Sea.
Me: *Playing Ouija board* Me: What's your name?

Ouija Board: I H A V E A B O Y F R I E N D
Co-Op is good for your resume. Sure it might be hard to coop with the workload, but instead of starting a job, you'll be resuming one.
Roses are red, Violets ate blue New Yorkers are polite 


So fuck you too. 
I saw a documentary on erections... It tackled some really hard subjects.
A guy shoots a random man on the street. Cop: "Did you kill this man?"
Guy: "No, a bullet killed him. Bullets are made of lead, which comes from the ground. The ground is part of nature. He died of natural causes. Case closed."
What do foxes breathe? Foxygen
Two wrongs don't make a right... ...just look at your parents. 
Why did Mel Gibson walk into a bar at 9am? 
He overslept.
Damn my wife is disgusting. I went downstairs to piss in the sink, and it was full of dishes!
I just got the lead in a silent film 
I’m absolutely speechless
You know what we think is funny... When I look into the mirror and we both laugh
A man is driving down the road and his car breaks down near a monastery. He goes to the monastery, knocks on the door, and says, "My car broke down. Do you think I could stay the night?"

The monks graciously accept him, feed him dinner, even fix his car. As the man tries to fall asleep, he hears a beautiful sound. A sound unlike anything he's ever heard before. The Sirens that nearly seduced Odysseus into crashing his ship comes to his mind. He doesn't sleep that night. He tosses and turns trying to figure out what could possibly be making such a seductive sound.

The next morning, he asks the monks what the sound was, but they say, "We can't tell you. You're not a monk." Distraught, the man is forced to leave.

Years later, after never being able to forget that sound, the man goes back to the monastery and pleads for the answer again.

The monks reply, "We can't tell you. You're not a monk."
The man says, "If the only way I can find out what is making that beautiful sound is to become a monk, then please, make me a monk."

The monks reply, "You must travel the earth and tell us how many blades of grass there are and the exact number of grains of sand. When you find these answers, you will have become a monk."

The man sets about his task. 

After years of searching he returns as a gray-haired old man and knocks on the door of the monastery. A monk answers. He is taken before a gathering of all the monks.

"In my quest to find what makes that beautiful sound, I traveled the earth and have found what you asked for: By design, the world is in a state of perpetual change. Only God knows what you ask. All a man can know is himself, and only then if he is honest and reflective and willing to strip away self deception."

The monks reply, "Congratulations. You have become a monk. We shall now show you the way to the mystery of the sacred sound."

The monks lead the man to a wooden door, where the head monk says, "The sound is beyond that door."

The monks give him the key, and he opens the door. Behind the wooden door is another door made of stone. The man is given the key to the stone door and he opens it, only to find a door made of ruby. And so it went that he needed keys to doors of emerald, pearl and diamond.

Finally, they come to a door made of solid gold. The sound has become very clear and definite. The monks say, "This is the last key to the last door."

The man is apprehensive to no end. His life's wish is behind that door!
With trembling hands, he unlocks the door, turns the knob, and slowly pushes the door open. Falling to his knees, he is utterly amazed to discover the source of that haunting and seductive sound......

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

But, of course, I can't tell you what it is because you're not a monk.
What's the last thing Gable Tostee's Tinder date said to him before walking on his apartment balcony? Cash me ousside, howbow dah?
Have you ever had sex while camping? It's fucking intense.
What do you call someone who sexually assaults avocados? A Guacamolester


Sorry for the shitty taco tuesday joke......not really.
3 Drunk guys entered a taxi. 3 drunk guys entered a taxi. The taxi driver knew that they were drunk so he started the engine & turned it off again. Then said, "We have reached your destination". The 1st guy gave him money & the 2nd guy said "Thank you". The 3rd guy slapped the driver. The driver was shocked thinking the 3rd drunk knew what he did. But then he asked "What was that for?". The 3rd guy replied, "Control your speed next time, you nearly killed us!"
Who is the best member of the communist version of the Beatles? John Lenin
What do a séance and a laxative have in common? They're both used to make things come forth!
I just read Trump's book "The Art of the Deal" It had four Chapter 11's. 
What do you get when you put a contagion in Nevada? Las Plague-as
Whoever invented the knock knock joke should receive a no-bell prize
So an emo teenager went to grocery store. He went up to the cashier and said, pointing to his scarred arm

"Hey, can you scan this?"

The cashier then scans the arm, only to say,

"I'm sorry sir, but this item is worthless"
I was born handsome, charming witty and wise I'm also a compulsive liar, but I think it evens out.
Possession is nine-tenths of the law The maxim of daemon lawyers everywhere
What do you call a bacterial assassin? Tumerculosis
How much is trump's life insurance worth? One Pence 
How does Chuck Norris flush the toilet? He doesn't. He scares the shit out of it.
Trump doesn't seem to have a problem... ...fucking immigrants.
Where are the most waffles dropped on the beach? San Diego.
Violence is never the answer Violence is the question

The answer is yes
I had a really successful sex change. I'm having more sex than I did last year. 
I like my women like I like my underwear Drenched in blood and feces. 
So I was at Target yesterday... I was at Target yesterday, and I saw this little girl who wanted to buy Halo 5. An old lady came up to her and said "Video games are for boys, buy something else." The girl, noticing that the lady had a box of cereal in her cart, said "Oh yeah? and trix are for kids!", then proceeded to grab the cereal out of her cart and run away
You Don't Know Shit    A guy was seated next to a 10-year-old girl on an airplane. Being bored, he turned to the girl and said, "Let's talk. I've heard that flights go quicker if you strike up a conversation with your fellow passenger."
   The girl, who was reading a book, closed it slowly and said to the guy, "What would you like to talk about?"
   "Oh, I don't know," said the guy. "How about nuclear power?"
   "OK," she said. "That could be an interesting topic. But let me ask you a question first. A horse, a cow and a deer all eat the same stuff... grass. Yet a deer excretes little pellets, while a cow turns out a flat patty, and a horse produces clumps of dried grass. Why do you suppose that is?"
   The guy thought about it and said, "Hmmm, I have no idea."
   To which the girl replied, "Do you really feel qualified to discuss nuclear power when you don't know shit?"
What does my first car and anal have in common? I didn't want it, but my dad gave it to me anyways. 
A person goes to r/Jokes And finds nothing but original content 
I was gunna make a joke but then I took an arrow to the knee
An 80s singer caught himself on fire, what does he do? Stop, Drop, and Rick-Roll
What furniture store did the murderer shop at? I KEA
Bush, Obama, and Trump go on a hunting trip. Their hunting guide instructs them to find and follow tracks and they should be able to find their quarry. 

Bush follows some tracks and gets a bear. Obama follows some tracks and gets a deer. 

Trump follows some tracks and gets hit by a train. 
Can a Toyota stretch? No, but a Mercedes-Benz
Knock knock Me: Knock knock!

Reddit-user: Who's there?

Me: To.

Reddit-user: To who?

Me: To whom*
What's the difference between obsequious behaviour towards someone important in order to gain advantage and John Wayne Gacy wearing a top hat and monocle? One is sycophancy and the other is a fancy sicko.

(As far as I'm aware this is an original joke that I created and am quite pleased with)
Trump is that lobster smart enough to get out of the saucepan to turn off the heat! Trudeau is the lobster that reaches out for the seasoning!
Why did the Mexican take a Xanax? For Hispanic attacks! 
Having a religion is like having a penis It's okay to have one, but just don't go around shoving it down people's throats.
I wish people would stop saying the husbands of the women who marched didn't get a sandwich that day. Have you seen those women? No way any of them have a husband.
Why does China like Trump so much? They built a great wall hundreds of years ago and they still don't have any Mexicans.
What do you call a Canadian shoe? A boot.
A woman goes to get welfare for her and her 9 children A woman goes to get welfare for her and her 9 children. When she gets to the counter the clerk asks for all her children's names; to which she promptly replies "Joe, Joe, Joe, Joe, Joe, Joe, Joe, Joe, and Joe."

The clerk is confused, so he asks, "Well if you want to tell them to go to bed what do you say?" 

She replies, "Joe go to bed."

He asks, "If you want them to eat their dinner what do you say?"

She replies, "Joe eat your dinner."

Finally he asks, "Well if you want to call them individually what do you say?!"

She simply says, "I just call them by their last names!"
Always borrow money from pessimists. They won't expect you to pay them back.
At my high school if idiots could fly... it would be a fucking airport.
How do you get an grammer nazi's attention? That. That is how.
A college girl once had a very active sex life... She especially loved hooking up with frat boys and men who had been sentenced to prison. Those were kind of her fetishes, and she didn't know why. She didn't really like to use condoms, though, which was very dumb of her, and she knew that, but she thought it felt so much better without one. Also, she was on birth control.

Only, one day, her period didn't come as expected. She thought it was probably nothing, but she was suspicious nonetheless. She went to the store and bought a pregnancy test, and, lo and behold, she was indeed pregnant. Well, shit. Due to her active sex life and having slept with all those prisoners and frat boys, she didn't really know, which one of them had gotten her pregnant. She thought about what she was to do. Should she keep the baby? How could she find the father? And then it hit her.

She had to make a list of all the bros and cons.
What did the alien say after anally probing the earthling? I come in peace. 
I play triangle in a reggae band I just stand at the back and ting 
What did Doctor Who say to his wife? It's bigger when it's inside.
Where do the world's most misleading people go to commit suicide? Sahr Chasm
Later tonight I might have consensual sex with my wife. ..if she's up for it.
"Ain't" is like a Swiss Army knife It's got a lot of uses but you can't use it in school. 
Why did the cucumber get embarrassed? Because it saw the salad dressing.
The Irish Millionaire Mick, from Dublin , appeared on 'Who Wants To Be A Millionaire' and towards the end of the program had already won 500,000 euros.

"You've done very well so far," said Chris Tarrant, the show's presenter, "but for a million euros you've only got one life-line left, phone a friend. Everything is riding on this question. Will you go for it?"

"Sure," said Mick. "I'll have a go!"

"Which of the following birds does NOT build its own nest?

a) Sparrow

b) Thrush,

c) Magpie,

d) Cuckoo?"

"I haven't got a clue." said Mick, ''So I'll use last lifeline and phone my friend Paddy back home in Dublin .."

Mick called up his mate, and told him the circumstances and repeated the question to him.

"Fookin hell, Mick!" cried Paddy. "Dat's simple it's a cuckoo."

"Are you sure?"

"I'm fookin sure."

Mick hung up the phone and told Chris, "I'll go with cuckoo as my answer."

"Is that your final answer?" asked Chris.

"Dat it is."

There was a long, long pause and then the presenter screamed, "Cuckoo is the correct answer! Mick, you've won 1 million euros!"

The next night, Mick went round to Paddy's to buy him a drink.

"Tell me, Paddy? How in Heaven's name did you know it was da Cuckoo that doesn't build its own nest?"

"Because he lives in a Fookin clock!"

"It was really something else, man!" said the cadet policeman to his partner... 
"When I was off duty Saturday night, I went to this big party, see, and pretty soon I noticed this fabulous little bird giving me the eye. Then she asked me to take her home. And just as soon as we were in the car, she unzipped me and went right down on the old fella - and I still didn't even know her name."

"So what did you do?" asked the other cop.

"Well, I figured this was one situation where I'd shoot first and ask questions afterward."
Trump discovered the lost spice girl... Stupid Spice
People told me getting my girlfriend a refridgerator for her birthday present was a bad idea. But her face lit up when she opened it.
I never realized how artistic horses used to be Today someone told me there used to be horse drawn carriages everywhere...
Diets are like relationships... They get easier if you allow yourself a cheat day
What's the difference between men and women? Boobs

Ba dum tits.
Why do bulemics like Kentucky Fried Chicken? Because it comes with a bucket. 
What do you call someone with no body or nose? Nobody knows 
The Burger Lady (Original) A man walks up to a burger stall where he is served by an extremely sad looking lady. 

“I’ll have a double cheeseburger please,” says the man before adding “and cheer up, it might never happen.”

“You're the fifth person who has told me to cheer up today,” replies the lady. “I’m sick of it! Who the hell are you to tell me to smile while I’m making your food?”

“I’m really sorry” he replies. “I can see now that it was a very insensitive thing to say. I have no right at all to tell you that you have to enjoy your job, get deep satisfaction from flipping burgers, or take pleasure in dishing out this greasy crap.”

Surprised by his honest admission, the burger lady says “Well, thanks for saying so. Apology accepted. Now how would you like your burger cooked?”

“With relish”  
She flew into a Rage and punched me in the jaw!! 
"I THOUGHT YOU WERE TAKING ME TO CLNIQUE!!
Oh honey no. I said I was taking you to a clinic.


So I went to see the doctor the other day And told him that I have a poop problem. Doctor: Okay now tell me what's going on.
Me: Everyday I poop at 8:00 in the morning 
Doctor: Okay so what's the problem
Me: I wake up at 9.
Eat Butter About a year ago I was healthy and happy but I noticed I was gaining some weight; my butt looked a bit too big in the mirror. So I mentioned to a super healthy facebook friend who is super slim and always posting sporty workout posts. Her weight loss advice was two words - "Eat Butter."

So I've been forcing myself to eat butter every day. First casually in food, then eat little chunks of it. But the weight was still piling on and getting worse. So even though it was making me sick I forced myself to eat a few spoonfuls a day, and eventually worked it up to two sticks a day. I got diarrhea regularly and I thought maybe it was working, but the scale and mirror told me it wasn't. Around six months in something changed in my body, and I stopped getting sick. Eating butter started to feel really comforting. I thought it was good, but the fat kept coming.

Then I'm crying about the weight a few days later, so I go back to the friend's post, and it actually said...

"Eat better."
What's similar between people who comment "have an upvote!" and extreme feminists? Nobody cares about either
A man with no carnal desires walks into a Freudian psychoanalyst's office The psychoanalyst stops him and says, "hey, buddy, I'm gonna need to see some id." 



Buzzfeed Top 10 least conductive items! Number 6 won't shock you
What do you call a single black mother? A black widow.
Did anyone hear what happened to the paraplegic at the disco? He got kicked out for arsing around
Eating pasta by myself.. makes me cannelloni.
A soldier ran up to his Sergeant It was during the middle of the Korean war. Bullets and bombs were everywhere...

A soldier ran up to his Sergeant and said "Serg Serg! I have to take a wicked shit!" The Sergeant replied "Private you have ten minutes, we need you on the front line, hurry up!"

The private ran off and was gone an hour and came strolling back with a smirk on his face when he crossed paths with his Sergeant who said "PRIVATE JOHNSON WHERE WERE YOU!?

"Well Serg, first off I took the absolute best shit of my life." 

"ANNNNND!??" Yelled the Sergeant. 

"And, on the way back I saw a girl laying there and the next thing I know we're having the best sex of my life."

"Oh? Is that right, OK private, did you get get any head?

"No, she didn't have a head".
A pirate walks into a bar... With a ships wheel attached to the front of his pants. The bartender says "Hey captain did you know you have a wheel on your crotch?" The captain growls and says "Arg it's driving me nuts!"
Some financial advice A man is getting into the shower just as his wife is finishing up her shower, when the doorbell rings. The wife quickly wraps herself in a towel and runs downstairs. When she opens the door, there stands Bob, the next-door neighbor. Before she says a word, Bob says:

"I’ll give you $800 to drop that towel." 

After thinking for a moment, the woman drops her towel and stands naked in front of Bob. A few seconds and a satisfying glance later, Bob hands her $800 and leaves. The woman wraps back up in the towel and goes back upstairs. When she gets to the bathroom, her husband asks: 

"Who was that?" 

"It was Bob the next door neighbor," she replies. 

"Great," the husband says, "did he say anything about the $800 he owes me?" 

Moral of the story: If you share critical information pertaining to credit and risk with your shareholders in time, you may be in a position to prevent avoidable exposure
To Mexicans: why should you stop exporting cheese to America? Because Trump is Nacho President
The weird thing about men is that, as they get older the begin wearing their pants higher and higher. My great-grandpa got so old he had to unzip just to talk to us! 
Remember, an NAND gate is an AND gate... ... but NOT
A blind man walks into a bar.... then a table, and then a chair.
Annoying Orange has 5 million subscribers, but has long since reached its peak. Now he's president of the United States.
Why didn't the bear have any friends? His personality was unbearable!
TIL that the guy who played Captain Kirk has set up a chain of clothing shops especially for older ladies. It's called Shatner Pants
My wife asked me where I wanted to be buried. Although I'm pretty sure "balls deep in your sister" wasn't the answer she wanted to hear. 
An old lady at the bank asked me if I could check her balance So I pushed her over
Ever wonder how many puppeteers there are in the world? Probably only a handful!
My grandpa has the heart of a lion... which is what happens when there aren't enough organ donors.
A cabbie was part of the protest #deleteuber and so he drove to JFK. When he got there no one was around. The protesters were all at the airport but he had shown up at JFK's grave.
Whats the most sensitive part of your body when masturbating? Your ears
There's an emo in my Web Development class, she's doing a website about jewellery Her first page was /Wrists
What do you get when you cross the Atlantic with the Titanic? Halfway. 
What did batman say to robin before they got in the car? "Get in the car."
Ladies and Gentlemen... Madeleine McCann! World Hide and Seek Champion 2007!
My wife and I were happy for 20 years Then we met each other.
Did you hear about the movie Constipation? It hasn't come out yet.
What type of fruit is always complaining about their lack of freedom in society? The Cant-eloupe
An Older Man Fixes Dessert for His Wife An older couple was sitting down watching TV one evening when the wife gets a hankering for some ice cream.

Wife: Honey, get me a bowl of ice cream, please.

The husband stands up to go get it. His wife stops him.

Wife: Oh, I also wants some chocolate syrup on it. Now write it down so you don't forget it.

Husband: I got it. Ice cream with chocolate syrup on it.

Wife: I also want sprinkles and a cherry. Write it down so you don't forget.

Husband: I got it. I got it. Ice cream with chocolate syrup, sprinkles, and a cherry.

The husband is in the kitchen for 45 minutes before coming back with a plate of scrambled eggs and some orange juice.

Wife: See! See! I told you to write it down! You forgot my bacon!
A man walks into a bar... The man is a muslim and the bar is in the U.S. 
Sometimes I wish I was a baker. Then I would be rolling in dough.
Women are like spaghetti... They're straight until they're wet
Sometimes my humour grows so dark, It starts gathering cotton in africa.


.. I feel awful now.


Betsy DeVos passed her Senate Confirmation hearing... and I, for one, am DeVostated. 
A man with a fork sticking out of his stomach A man goes to see the doctor.  He has a fork sticking out of his stomach and there's blood everywhere.

"Doctor, doctor, help me!"

The doctor looks at the man, and then looks at his watch.  "I'm sorry, but it's 5pm and my work day is over."

"But doctor, please do something!"

The doctor thinks for a moment, then grabs the fork and sticks it in the man's eye.  "Go to the oculist -- he works until 6."

*Note: I originally heard this one in Russian*
Love is like a Fart If you've got to force it it's probably shit!
I'd hate to grow up to be a geologist. Because I'd always be taken for granite. 
Come up with your own Original joke without any time to think. Rules inside As soon as you are finished reading this just start typing.  No time to think.  Don't use jokes you've heard in the past.  You can't stop typing! lets see how bad these turn out.  Ready? Go!
What did the man say after his Tripod fell down for the fifth time in a row? I can't stand this anymore
Donald Trump is a good Christian So then can someone explain why he wrote an executive order that literally would ban Jesus (who comes from the middle east)?
What did the leper say to the prostitute? Keep the tip
the best girlfriend What's the difference between my ex and the titanic? The titanic only went down on 1,000 people.
A tranny, Mushit and a black guy are in a burning building and I can only save one of them You kidding me? Why would I risk my life to do that?
I saw a girl with 12 nipples the other day.. Sounds funny,  

Dozen tit?
What's a lawyers least favourite PC case. An open case.

Republicans love black people! They send millions of them to a place where they get a free room, free rent and a gym membership
What does a priest and a silver medalist have in common? They both came in a little behind.
What's Jackie Chan's favorite type of car? KIIIIIAAAAAAAAAAA! 
A nerd joke. Me: look at my graphics card

Other person: what's the clock speed

Me: it's so high it hertz
Why was Hillary Clinton's ass jealous? All the shit was coming from her mouth.
Clown walks into a bar... Clown walks into a bar and says, "Bartender, give me a treehouse."
Bartender says, "A treehouse, what's in a treehouse?"

Clown says, "Playboys and cigars, of course!"
The only difference between group sex and group therapy... is that in group therapy you hear about everyone's problems, and in group sex you see them.
I asked my friend who is an American diplomat how life was He said he can't complain
After crossing which line in Siberia, can you no longer escape it? The evenk horizon
When all else fails... ...make All Else 2.
A father sits down with his 10 year old son to talk to him about the birds and the bees.

He says, "Son, I think it's about time I told you about the birds and the bees. When a man and a wom..."

The son cuts his dad off mid-sentence and says, "I already know about sex, dad."

Feeling both outraged and relived the dad asks, "Who told you?"

The son replies, "Father McKinney, after mass."
 
"Well, how much do you know?"

And the son says "We just went over the ins and outs."
TIL there are 189 countries NOT affected by President Trumps Extreme Vetting Executive Order. I guess 7 isn't that bad.
How do you know a dog is better than a wife? Lock them both in the trunk of your car and see who is happier to see you after an hour when you let them out.
Yesterday my wife told me I was a selfish lover. I was so shocked I nearly choked on my own cock.  
From the South, but Not Southern People: You're from the south? But you don't have an accent.

Me: I know, my parents put me in school.
A guy goes to a particularly strange drive thru... The menu reads

Burgers - $5
Handjobs - $10

A sexy waitress says "Can I take your order?"

"Are you the girl doing the handjobs?"

"Why yes, I am"

The man hands the waitress $10 and says "Well clean your hands, because I want two burgers."
I misheard the Muslim ban as Muslim band I thought either Donald Trump is really into percussion or I've misunderstood.
There's a new antidepressant on the market for lesbians. Trycoxagin
How do you get a nun pregnant? You fuck her. 
What did the doctor say to the midget waiting in the lobby? You're going to have to be a little patient.
Square Testicles An elderly woman walked into the Royal Bank of Ireland one morning with a purse full of money. She wanted to open a savings account and insisted on talking to the president of the Bank because, she said, she had a lot of money.
 
After many lengthy discussions (after all, the client is always right) an employee took the elderly woman to the president's office.
 
The president of the Bank asked her how much she wanted to deposit. She placed her purse on his desk and replied, '$165,000'.
 
The president was curious and asked her how she had been able to save so much money. The elderly woman replied that she made bets.
 
The president was surprised and asked, 'What kind of bets?'
 
The elderly woman replied, 'Well, I bet you $25,000 that your testicles are square.'
 
The president started to laugh and told the woman that it was impossible to win a bet like that.         
The woman never batted an eye. She just looked at the president and said, 'Would you like to take my bet?'
 
'Certainly', replied the president. 'I bet you $25,000 that my testicles are not square.'
 
'Done', the elderly woman answered. 'But given the amount of money involved, if you don't mind I would like to come back at 10 ' clock tomorrow morning with my lawyer as a witness.' 'No problem', said the president of the Bank confidently.
 
That night, the president became very nervous about the bet and spent a long time in front of the mirror examining his testicles, turning them this way and that, checking them over again and again until he was positive that no one could consider his testicles as square and reassuring himself that there was no way he could lose the bet.
 
The next morning at exactly 10 o'clock the elderly woman arrived at the president's office with her lawyer and acknowledged the $25,000 bet made the day before that the president's testicles were square.
 
The president confirmed that the bet was the same as the one made the day before. Then the elderly woman asked him to drop his pants etc. so that she and her lawyer could see clearly.
 
The president was happy to oblige.
 
The elderly woman came closer so she could see better and asked   the president if she could touch them. 'Of course', said the president. 'Given the amount of money involved, you should be 100% sure.'
 
The elderly woman did so with a little smile. Suddenly the president noticed that the lawyer was banging his head against the wall. He asked the elderly woman why he was doing that and she replied, 'Oh, it's probably because I bet him $100,000 that around 10 o'clock in the morning I would be holding the balls of the President of the Royal Bank of Ireland.'
Breitbart news is a lot like my girlfriend Fake. 
Once I heard a man talking about a cul-de-sac. Turns out he was an Italian with an STD. 
Betsy DeVos wants to eliminate trigonometry from school math curricula because it teaches our children to sin
According to a recent survey, 6 out of 7 dwarfs aren't Happy. 
What I hate most about this subreddit: What I hate most about this subreddit:


When the first line is the title.
Never tell me friction jokes... I just won't let them slide. 
What did the bottle say to the glass after a long night? Nothing, they were both shattered.
I just don't get why so many Trump supporters are into BBW? Seriously though. His supporters even love that big beautiful Jewish one in Israel.
How many "Suh Dude"s does it take to screw in a lightbulb? None. It's already lit fam
A kid had sex with his teacher So the kid just got of school and he got into the car with his mom. The mom asks, "What did you do at school today?" The kid replies, "I had sex with the teacher." The mom was furious so when they got home, she told him to go to his room and wait for his father to come home. Well the father came home from work a couple hours later and the mother told him what their son said. The dad walks up to his sons room and says, "Son, I'm proud of you. I'm going to buy you a new bike." Later that day they got the bike and the father asks, "Would you like to try it out?" The son replies, "Not now. My butt still hurts
Why was the mushroom invited to the party? Because he's a fungi.

Why was he asked to leave the party?

Because there wasn't mushroom.
I used to date a girl with a lazy eye... but I dumped her because I could never hit the target. Like the carnival game of getting the water in the clowns mouth.
Why is the psychic so confident about the predictions she makes for 3 years out? Because she can see what is going to happen in 2020 crystal clear.
People told me the blind people's convention was great. I'm not really seeing it.
My shelf has been making weird clicking noises since I bought it it might be a Geiger counter
A fat Hawaiian man recently converted to Islam Aloha Snack-bar
A judge was arrested after ordering a group of crows confined to an insane asylum. What for? Committing a murder.
A young couple are showering together A young couple are showering when the girlfriend says, "Honey I want you to do something naughty."
The boyfriend agrees. 
He then proceeds to drop shampoo in her left eye. 
A skeleton walks into a bar... ...he orders a beer and a mop.
So a man is on a cruise... That's sponsored by the Democratic party for a fundraiser. He's walking around enjoying his time when he comes across a group of people watching a game of limbo. 
He sees that the crowd is really enjoying watching the game, so he hops in. 
When it's his turn to go under, he ducks waaayy under the bar as a show off to the crowd. As he expected, the crowd loves it and starts cheering and shouting. 
On his next turn, the man ducks even further under the bar than he did before, and the crowd goes wild! 
The man, excited by the crowd, shouts "Oh yeah? How about this?!" And grabs the bar and puts it on the very bottom peg and slides under with ease. 
To his surprise however, everyone in the crowd becomes enraged and starts throwing their drinks and appetizers at the man. 
The man, soaked from head to toe goes to the DJ and asks "what the hell was that?!"

The DJ turns to the man and says, "well you lowered the bar sooo much that they thought you were Donald Trump"
What was the cat amputee's reaction to her successful transplant? It gave her pause
What do you call an Arab man without any goats? A virgin.
The European Union commissioners announce that an agreement has been reached to adopt English as the preferred language for European communications... As part of the negotiations, Her Majesty's Government conceded that English spelling had some room for improvement and has accepted a five-year phased plan for what will be known as EuroEnglish (Euro for short).

In the first year, "s" will be used instead of the soft "c." Sertainly, sivil servants will resieve this news with joy. Also, the hard "c" will be replased with "k". Not only will this klear up konfusion, but typewriters kan have one less letter.

There will be growing publik enthusiasm in the sekond year, when the troublesome "ph" will be replased by "f". This will make words like fotograf" 20 persent shorter.

In the third year, publik akseptanse of the new spelling kan be expekted to reach the stage where more komplikated changes are possible. Governments will enkorage the removal of double letters, which have always ben a deterent to akurate speling. Also, al wil agre that the horible mes of silent "e"s in the languag is disgrasful, and they would go.

By the fourth year, peopl wil be reseptiv to steps such as replasing "th" by "z" and "w" by " v".

During ze fifz year, ze unesesary "o" kan be dropd from vords kontaining "ou", and similar changes vud of kors be aplid to ozer kombinations of leters.

After zis fifz yer, ve vil hav a reli sensibl riten styl. Zer vil be no mor trubls or difikultis and evrivun vil find it ezi tu understand ech ozer.

Ze drem vil finali kum tru.


A Vegan goes into a Mcdonalds and says 'I'm hungry but I can't eat anything with a face' The manager comes over.

"Sir, by the time we serve your food it hasn't GOT a face".

What is a hispanics favorite arcade game? Guac-a-mole.
Why did the Death Star destroy the planet? For Alderaan reasons
What do Ivanka Trump and JFK airport have in common? Donald wouldn't be happy if a muslim entered either of them.

what's the difference between a gay man and a refrigerator ? 
The fridge doesn't fart when you pull your meat out

Breaking News: Coup Underway - Trump takes control of senate and declares martial law! Oh wait... That was Palpatine. 
False alarm.
Heard this one shopping at a mom and pop store. Maybe NSFW Store employee: do you know what slaves and coffee have in common?
Me: uhhhhhh.
Store employee: They're free!
As he pointed to their complimentary coffee.
What did the earth say to the other planets? Wow. You guys have no life.
The wife and I mixed it up a bit last night... We washed the silverware BEFORE the dishes!
What's the difference between roast beef and pea soup? You can roast beef but you cant pee soup.
What's brown and sits in the forest? Winnie's pooh.
I think James A. Garfield Presidency was impactful He really trained for it
What is the difference between sand and menstrual fluid? It's difficult to gargle sand.
Why did the chicken cross the Mobius loop? To get to the other ... errr ... ummm ... wait ...
What is the best way to eat a vegetable? Remove the wheelchair first.
Mountains aren't just funny, They are hill areas
What's the difference between a Syrian chapel and a Turkish terrorist camp? America will let in people from the terrorist camp.
An alien visits Earth... An alien visits Earth and visits New York. He passes a pastry shop and he sees a huge crowd, fighting for the tastiest, freshest batch of freshly-cooked bread. "Me, me, me!" he hears. He passes by the candy shop where an teenager steals a lollipop from a little girl and she ends up fussing and screaming, stomping her legs left and right saying "He stole my lollipop!" he hears. He later passes by a restaurant, and sees a couple arguing over manners. "Forks and knives! Forks and knives, I tell you!" He wondered what that meant, but kept repeating it to himself. He passes a homeless man who won the lottery, screaming 'YEEEES!' - so the alien, confused, remembers the emotion and the word.

As the streets emptied, the sky darkened, the alien enters an apartment building where it smelled and creaked with every step. He enters the first apartment, and sees an old man, drunk, lying on the floor. He didn't realize that the cops, who were called in, were behind him.

- Who did this? asked the cop
- ME ME ME! - screamed the alien
- Why did you do it?
- He stole my lollipop! - cried the alien
- With what? With a gun?
- Forks and knives! Forks and knives, I tell ya! -he answered
- You're coming with us!
- YEEEEES!
What do you call two stoners getting married? A weeding




What do you call a Saudi who doesn't care about current events? Living under Iraq.
Penguin A bartender was working late at night when suddenly a man ran bursting through the door and asked the bartender. 

Man: "QUICK, HOW TALL IS A PENGUIN?" 

The bartender slightly confused, he simply said. 

Bartender: "about this tall"

The man started to panic and said. 

Man: "Oh god i ran over a nun!"
Why did the chicken cross the road? To get to the chicks
What did the philosophical whisker say to the other? Man, we've really grown far from our roots.
It has been said that William Tell and his family were avid bowlers. However all the league records were destroyed in a fire, so we will never know for whom the Tells bowled.
A man just walked into my house and demanded I feed and water him. Offer him all my hospitality and pay him for watching my TV. I told him to back after Brexit. We don't want to do that in out country anymore.
How do you stop a dog from humping your leg.. Pic him up and suck on his dick 
I tied some rope yesterday It was knot that interesting
Did you read the menu? 'Cause all I see is me 'n u
In Soviet America... Putin elects you.
After years of my mom telling me to bond with my stepdad... We finally bonded over a shared annoyance of her forcing us to do bonding activities.

I guess you could call it ironic bonding.
The Pope visits Texas The Pope was state bound scheduled to give a speech in Dallas, TX. On their way to the venue the Pope rolls down the privacy glass in the limo and says to his chauffeur, "Hey, you know what? I've always rode in these things, but I've never driven one! Do you mind if we switch spots?" Being it was the Pope himself, the chauffeur felt he couldn't say no so he obliged and exchanged seats.
It had been years since the Pope had driven, and he was having the time of his life cruising down the interstate going over 100mph! Consequently he was clocked by a state trooper and pulled over. As the trooper approached the vehicle and got a glance at the driver he quickly turned around and returned to his squad car to call his supervisor. 

The trooper called in and told the sergeant, "Sergeant, I'm afraid I pulled over someone very very important."
In which he replied," Well, who is it, the governor?"
"No, no, much more important than that!"
"The President?!"
"I'm afraid even more important than that!"
"Well, who the hell is it then?!" 
"I don't know, but his chauffeur is the freakin' Pope!"
An Indian man was recently hospitalised after inhaling too many spices... He spent a month in a korma.
I was stealing kitchen utensils last night... And I barely made it out without getting caught. But it was a whisk I was willing to take.
A big Texan stopped at a local restaurant following a day roaming around in Mexico. While sipping his tequila, he noticed a sizzling, scrumptious looking platter being served at the next table. Not only did it look good, but the smell was wonderful.

He asked the waiter, "What is that you just served?"

The waiter replied, "Ah, Señor, you have excellent taste! Those are called Cojones de Toro, bull's testicles from the bull fight this morning. A real delicacy!"

The cowboy said, "What the heck, bring me an order."

The waiter replied, "I am so sorry, Señor. There is only one serving per day because there is only one bull fight each morning. If you come early and place your order, we will be sure to save you this delicacy."

The next morning, the cowboy returned, placed his order, and that evening was served the one and only special delicacy of the day

After a few bites, inspecting his platter, he called to the waiter and said, "These are delicious, but they are much, much smaller than the ones I saw you serve yesterday."

The waiter shrugged his shoulders and replied, "Si, Señor. Sometimes the bull wins."
A man who walked into the the bar... Then he said to the bartender, "I bet you didn't see the second 'the' in the title, did you?"
A southern white woman waits in her seat in a restaurant alone. She keeps looking around, with an anxious look on her face. She takes sips of her wine and keeps checking her phone, reading over the Tinder conversations of the sweet guy she met.

Finally, her date arrives. A handsome white man, in a white button-up shirt and blue jeans. He sits down and apologizes for being late. 

"It's not problem, hun" she says, laughing nervously. "There's one thing I gotta ask you though: it said on your Tinder bio that you're "a rapist"? Do you, like... HAVE to put that on there... legally?" 

The man is shocked at her words. "What?? Oh my goodness, that must be a typo! No no no, I'm very strongly against that sort of action. No, I'm a *racist*." 

"Oh, thank God! For a second there, I was really worried about my safety!" 
What's the difference between a rooster, and a whore? A Rooster will wake the farmer with "a Cock a Doodle Doo!"

whereas

a Whore will wake the farmer as "a Any Cock'll Doo!"


Vegans are just as bad as non vegans. Stop drinking water, THATS A *FISHES HOUSE* YOU SICK FUCK!
Timmy: Is it a sin to wear shorts? They are so comfortable. Catholic Priest: No, I don't think its wrong to enjoy feeling little boys shorts.
Little Timmy's english lesson... ...was about food today.

"Good morning class" says the teacher, "today's lesson is about food! Let's start by mentioning things we can eat. Come on kids."

Sally raises her arm "bread!"

"Very good, Sally!" Says the teacher.

"Cornflakes!" says Billy.

"Good one, cornflakes! Anyone else?"

Timmy raises his hand and yells "Lamps!'

The teacher pauses for a moment, confused: "Lamps? You can't eat lamps, what made you think that?"

Timmy: "well last night I was walking past my parent's bedroom and I heard my dad say to my mom: turn off the lamp cause I'm gonna shove it down your throat."
Silence is golden. Duct tape is silver.
Catch me if you can... ...said the phrase to the other phrase
How can I invest in the Mexican airline industry? Call me crazy but once this wall goes up I’ve got a gut-feeling I think that’s one industry that will really be taking off. 
How are new pants like a sub-par mansion? There's no ball room
Why did Steve Bannon call Trump supporters working-class hobbits? Because they're friends with grand wizards.
I was gonna masturbate to Ellen. But I just wasn't feeling it.
So a man backs into a car... So  older man backs into a car while trying to leave a parking lot. After hitting the car, the old man looks in the mirror to see a midget hop out, obviously very angry. The midget goes up to the door and yells, "You just back into me, and I'm not happy". The elderly man takes off his glasses and responds, "Well then which one are ya". 
What's black and white and red all over? A sunburnt penguin.
I'm looking for a joke about a sandwich I saw the other day so I can repost it... Ah, right sub!
Why do cows wear bells? Because their horns don't work.
I hooked up my accelerator pedal in my car to my brake lights I hit the gas, people behind me stop, and I'm gone.  

Credit to Steven Wright.
What is a Sith Lord's favorite drink at the bar? A Palpitini
A first-grade teacher, Ms. Brooks, was having trouble with one of her students... A first-grade teacher, Ms. Brooks, was having trouble with one of her students. The teacher asked, "Harry, what's your problem?"
Harry answered, "I'm too smart for the 1st grade. My sister is in the 3rd grade and I'm smarter than she is! I think I should be in the 3rd grade too!"

Ms. Brooks had had enough. She took Harry to the principal's office.

While Harry waited in the outer office, the teacher explained to the principal what the situation was. The principal told Ms. Brooks he would give the boy a test. If he failed to answer any of his questions he was to go back to the 1st grade and behave. She agreed.

Harry was brought in and the conditions were explained to him and he agreed to take the test.

Principal: "What is 3 x 3?"
Harry: "9."

Principal: "What is 6 x 6?"

Harry: "36."

And so it went with every question the principal thought a 3rd grader should know.

The principal looks at Ms. Brooks and tells her, "I think Harry can go to the 3rd grade"

Ms. Brooks says to the principal, "Let me ask him some questions."
The principal and Harry both agreed.

Ms. Brooks asks, "What does a cow have four of that I have only two of?"

Harry, after a moment: "Legs."

Ms. Brooks: "What is in your pants that you have but I do not have?"

The principal wondered why would she ask such a question!

Harry replied: "Pockets."

Ms. Brooks: "What does a dog do that a man steps into?"

Harry: "Pants."

Ms. Brooks: What starts with a C, ends with a T, is hairy, oval, delicious and contains thin, whitish liquid?"

Harry: "Coconut."

The principal sat forward with his mouth hanging open.

Ms. Brooks: "What goes in hard and pink then comes out soft and sticky?"

The principal's eyes opened really wide and before he could stop the answer, Harry replied, "Bubble gum."

Ms. Brooks: "What does a man do standing up, a woman does sitting down and a dog does on three legs?"

Harry: "Shake hands."

The principal was trembling.

Ms. Brooks: "What word starts with an 'F' and ends in 'K' that means a lot of heat and excitement?"

Harry: "Firetruck."

The principal breathed a sigh of relief and told the teacher, "Put Harry in the fifth-grade, I got the last seven questions wrong.
I was stunned last night when my wife told me I was too wrapped up in myself. When the hell did I get a wife?
What do you call a pet Ewok that stays inside? An Endor pet
What do you call a formula that can predict Al Gore's dance moves? An Al Gore Rhythm algorithm.