Who was the first striker? Jesus. He went for the cross
You don't have to be good at anagrams  to see that Pope Benedict is an Epic Bent Pedo.

As a man of Jewish descent As a man of Jewish descent I don't like jokes about us Jews. 
I think they often cement prejudices and misinterpretations of the Jewish people and culture. 
But every now and then even I enjoy a good laugh and feel that I shouldn't be so serious about everything. 

So I have a very good joke about the holocaust here if anyone wants to buy it?
If my girlfriend was a Pokemon her name would be...... Vulva-sore 
I justified buying a PS3 because I knew I could always use it to just watch movies, and now that's the only reason I still have it. A 250GB hard drive holds a shitload of internet porn
What would happen if Leafy went to The Filthy Frank show? Chin-chin would leave.
I've got two kids, jane and emma, they get bullied at school.  I can't make it stop but i can help them rise above it. The other day i said to them, “Look, boys…”
Playing Trivial Pursuit with Grandma: “Name an animated character dedicated to cleaning up the planet, who loves Eva?”  

Nana: “Hitler.”
A whole city block is burning, and fire trucks from all about are called in, and trying to take down the flames when... This old, ancient, piece of junk fire truck drives right in the middle of the fire, and takes complete control of the situation; saving the day. After hours, and hours of of fire fighting, the reporters can't wait to interview the captain of this mysterious savior that came out of nowhere.  
  
"So, hello sir. The city thanks you for your bravery, and we heard, will even give a large sum of money to your district for saving the day. What will you do with the money?"  
"Well, first thing is I tell you, we're buying some fucking new breaks for the truck..."
Why were the locals dissapointed when an old, decrepit, broken down bus rolled into an Egyptian town? They wished it was Anubis.
There was a knock in my door "Who's there?"

"Police"

"Get out, I didn't call police, I called whores"

"Your neighbors called us"

"Let them fuck you then"
I came home and noticed my dishwasher was missing So I asked my kids what happened. Apparently she left me 3 days ago.
I was in a bank yesterday and all the money just floated out the door by itself. It was a polterheist.
If at first you don't succeed... Well, there goes your skydiving career.
What does a sick billionaire say? "I feel like a million bucks" 
Harambe walks into a bar Bartender: What will you be drinking?

Harambe: I'll have a beer

Me: No, he'll have just ice

Bartender: Just ice?

Me: Yes. Justice for Harambe.
Here is this woman who loves her man, but he loves blowjobs, and she just can't bring herself to doing... that. So, one day, she enters a sex shop in a sketchy part of town, and sees this frog in the showcase. "Blowjob giving frog," it said. So, she buys it, brings it home, explains the situation to her husband, and goes back out to give them some alone time...  
  
She comes back home a few hours later, and her husband has got the frog in the kitchen sink, and he saying "come on, come on!" "What are you doing honey?" "If I can teach it how to do the dishes, you're out of here!"
What do I know about dwarves? Very little.
What does a cannibal do after dumping his girlfriend? He wipes his butt.
I Hate Watching Romantic Movies at the Cinema I hate watching romantic movies at the cinema because I'm the only one who laughs, especially at those crying in front of me. 
I was trying to think of a joke about numbers and golf balls... then someone yelled, "FOUR!", and it hit me.
Girl: My doctor says I can't have sex for two weeks…:-( Boy: What did your dentist say?
How Can You Tell When The NSA is Monitoring Your Computer? The power is on and you're connected to the internet.
Back in the day America was great, had Apple come out with AirPods, the entrepreneurs would found a brand new market for ear snuggies, clips, bands, and scooches, in designer colors, and celebrity themes. So they haven't got jack to complain about.
Will Glass Coffins Be A Success? Remains to be seen.

Little Johnny A boy named little Johnny started his first day of middle school in Los Angeles. 

Now, I say los Angeles only because Johnny 's parents recently decided to move to California over the summer, cuz they could afford it.

Anyways, good ol Johnny begins to notice he's the only white kid in his classes. He says to himself "ehh who gives a shit this ain't gonna be any different from other school." 

Eventually johnny gets to history class, 
His favorite subject, and sits eagerly hardly paying attention to the fact that his class is totally Hispanic other than him.

The teacher says "okay class today we're gong to be  going over some basic American history. Now, who can tell me the name of the first president?"

Johnny ' hand shoots up.

"Yes Josè?"

"George Washington?"

"Very good!"

Johnny stirs in his seat.

"Okay class, who created the first flag?"

Johnny's hand shoots up before anyone elses.

"Yes isabelle?"

"Betsy Ross!"

"Excellent!"

Johnny's face turns a shade redder. 

Okay class, last one: who can tell me where the declaration of the United States was created?"

Johnny's arm is so high up he's straining his muscles and leaning on top of his seat.

"Yes miss sanchez?"

Johnny mumbles: these god damn fuckin mexicans

The teacher yells "Who said that?!"

Johnny stands up and says "DAVY FUCKIN CROCKETT AT THE ALAMO"
What car did the Apostles drive? (Hint:Acts 2:1 KJV)
I use to have crabs... Until the bigger bugs ate them.
What kind of fruit always has a wedding_ A cantaloupe.....
Why can Kylie Jenner see right through Caitlin? She's trans-parent.
What happens to a necrophiliac after death? Reserection 
A girl asked me for sex yesterday. I had to disappoint her.  We had sex.
How does a Marxist jack off? By seizing the means of reproduction. 
I ran into Harambe for the first time in a while last night I ran into Harambe for the first time in a while last night, so we decided to go get a drink.

Bartender: what'll you have?
Harambe: I'll have a beer.
Me: no, he'll have a shot.
I loved going to the psychiatrist as a young girl. 
He said “I think I can see the problem, Mr Smith.”
Did you know you can't watch porn on the IPhone 7? Yea they took the jack off
Question starts with a Q... ...and ends with an E.
What's the most frustrating part about being a sheep farmer? Every time you try to take inventory, you fall asleep.  
What do you call it when Harrison Ford gets heatburn? Indy-gestion 



I'm sorry I'm a little drunk
What was Michael Jackson's favourite musical key? A Minor
A Beautiful Poem Roses are red,
This year has been hot,
But the world's gotten colder
Since Harambe was shot
What does a girl want more than anything in the world? Nothing. She's fine.

girl if we were pokemon you would be a pichu and i would be a raichu because im a convicted child molestor
During a job interview yestarday I poured some water into a cup and it overflowed slightly "Nervous?" asked the interviewer, I simply replied "No I always give 110%"

I heard a group of pedophiles dressed up as superheroes and molested kids at birthday parties . Apparently they called themselves the Justkids League .
What's the best way to get gum out of your hair? Cancer.
Gandalf did 9/11, it said so in The Two Towers.
Potheads must have been disappointed with Jurassic Park... 'Cause there's no grass. 
Today I'm cancer free! And all the days before that, but it still counts.
Did you hear that Trump said he'd eliminate food safety regulations? It's the only way they can bring Trump steaks back. 
I like my women like I like my coffee... ...ground up and in the freezer
What's the difference between a mixologist and a bartender? About ten minutes.
How many super saiyans does it take to change a light bulb? Find out next time, on Dragon Ball Z!
What's a cats favorite thing to do? Meowtain Climbing
So I Organized a three-way last night... There was a couple of no-shows, but overall, it worked out fine.
How did the executioner learn about knots? By watching the noose.
Two Beggars Two beggars are sitting side by side on a street in Rome. One has a cross in front of him; the other one the Star of David. Many people go by and look at both beggars, but only put money into the hat of the beggar sitting behind the cross. A priest comes by, stops and watches throngs of people giving money to the beggar behind the cross, but none give to the beggar behind the Star of David. Finally, the priest goes over to the beggar behind the Star of David and says, "My poor fellow, don't you understand? This is a Catholic country; this city is the seat of Catholicism. People aren't going to give you money if you sit there with a Star of David in front of you, especially when you're sitting beside a beggar who has a cross. In fact, they would probably give to him just out of spite." The beggar behind the Star of David listened to the priest, turned to the other beggar with the cross and said: "Moishe, look who's trying to teach the Goldstein brothers about marketing."
If you ever get a job at a bank, take care not to slice your hand open while handling notes and coins. If that happens, you'll be sure to get a pay cut.
I was very upset at the funeral the other day.  I started wailing and moaning and banging on the coffin  
 
In the end they opened it and let me out.
You're not able to watch porn on the iPhone7.. Yeah, they took the jack off. 
I never warn my wife I never warn my wife before I pull the anal beads out.. 

I like starting the mower on the first tug.

Why does Donald Trump sound like an asshole on TV? Because he's probably an asshole.
What's the hardest part about being a pedophile? What's the hardest part about being a pedophile?

Fitting in.
A Polish guy went to check his vision... **Doctor asked** - *can you read any of those letters? read it for* me.

The eye test chart: C Z J W I N O S T A W C Z

**Polish guy** - *Oh god, I know that guy!!*
My friend lives in Colorado and told me he wanted to start growing weed on his cow farm. I told him it wasn't a good idea. The steaks would be too high.
How many Police officers does it take to change a light bulb? None.  They just beat the room for being black.
I've read all of Charles Dickens's novels except one. I don't have *Great Expectations*.
A blonde decides to learn and try horse back riding unassisted without prior experience or lessons... She mounts the horse with great effort, and the tall, shiny horse springs into motion.

 It gallops along at a steady and rhythmic pace, but the blonde begins to slip from the saddle. 

Out of shear terror, she grabs for the horse's mane but cannot seem to get a firm grip. 

She tries to throw her arms around the horse's neck, but she slides down the side of the horse anyway.

 The horse gallops along, seemingly oblivious to its slipping rider.

 Finally, giving up her frail grip, she leaps away from the horse to try and throw herself to safety. 

Unfortunately, her foot has become entangled in the stirrup. 

She is now at the mercy of the horse's pounding hooves as her head is struck against the ground again and again. 

As her head is battered against the ground, she is mere moments away from unconsciousness or even death, when Frank, the Wal-Mart manager, runs out to shut the horse off.
I was in the gym. "1,2,3,4," counted my personal trainer, as I panted.

"Come on," he added, "Now we've got you down the stairs, we can do a workout!" 
What do you call something that swims, is big and has 4 legs? A whale with a table taped to it.
What's the best thing about twenty eight year olds? There's twenty of them. 


What would I do if Future tried talking to me? I'd autotune him out. :)
A duck checks into a hotel A duck checks into a hotel, goes to his room, then calls the front desk and asks them to send up a condom. The hotel employee says, "Very good sir, shall I put it on your bill?" and the duck says, "Are you a fucking idiot? I'll suffocate!"
What did the Duck say to the Prostitute? "Put it on my bill"
A man runs into a bar... ...Of steel. He ends up breaking one of his ribs.
Two guys are watching a dog lick his dick... and one guy says to the other, "Man, I wish I could do that."

So the other guy says, "Don't you think you should at least pet him first?"

Credit goes to the old man who came through my check stand a while back.
Bill Clinton has been battling the same illness for 17 years. Pneumonica.
Why won't the US change over to the Metric system? Because we'd rather die on our feet than live on your 30.48 centimeters.
What does the Doctor use to keep things running smoothly in the T.A.R.D.I.S? WD-4D
What was the Seagull's favorite online streaming service? Netfocks
Whats an iPhone 7's favorite brand of frozen pizza? Not Jack's.
The longest Joke in the world... Is very long.
Leave Apple alone! All they wanted to do was jack off.
What kind of wizard loves hickeys? A necromancer.
Why are gay guys bad at jenga? They don't worry about pulling out
Wynona Ryder was great in Stranger Things. She stole the show
I used to be scared of pretty girls, So my Mom explained that was silly, because they're much more scared of me. 
I was offered sex with a 21 year old girl today... In exchange, I was supposed to advertise some kind of bathroom cleaner. Of course I declined, because I am a person with high moral standards and strong willpower. Just as strong as Ajax, the super strong bathroom cleaner. Now available with scented lemon or vanilla.
What does Pikachu say when he puts too much salsa on his food? PIKA PIKA PIKA

(Credit to my 5 year old son)
My Eye Doctor I had a ridiculously corny joke about me visiting my eye doctor this morning, but stopped myself from posting it here because I didn't think it was that funny. 

I said to myself *"Come one, you're better than this, you can think of something cornea".* 
I asked a friend of mine what it was like being a herb farmer.... ...He said its not so bad and that he had a lot of thyme on his hands.
You guys hear about the new corduroy pillows? Their making headlines! (Thanks u/boogersugaraddiction)
What does the chicken do to get through college? She strips.
An Indian man is at home... An Indian man is at home, cooking for his family. He is a very wealthy scientist, so he was able to purchase a tandoor. Tonight he decides to break it in. As he takes his bread out, he notices something strange. It almost falls apart in his hands. As he gets it on the plate, it turns into a viscous liquid. Amazed, he began trying to figure out what this was. After several minutes of keeping his family waiting, he let's out an audible "Aha!" He then proceeds to slam his fist onto the bread. Miraculously, the bread held together and almost seemed to form a solid. 

"Just as I thought." He says. 
"A Naan-Newtonian Fluid."
We burried my grandmother last week... So she's probably dead by now.
My Garden Statue Called In Sick Today He has Gnome-onia.
This joke is like a party without any demand for fruit juice. There is no punch line.
What sound does a street sweeper make? Broom Broom
Mommies and Daddies [nsfw] A guy goes to prison for tax fraud and winds up sharing a cell with an absolutely massive violent offender called Bubba.

The cell door shuts for the night and the lights go out. Our protagonist is curled up on his bed literally fearing for his life on his first night in prison. Out of the darkness he hears his cell mate Bubba speak for the first time in a meanacing tone,

"Do you want to play mommies and daddies?"

Our mans heart sinks at the prospect of what is about to happen.

"Erm, no, not really" he replies meekly.

"We're playing mommies and daddies!" says Bubba in an even more menacing and gravelly tone. "Do you want to be mummy or daddy?"

Resigned to his fate, our hero considers which is worse, to fuck, or be fucked. After a few moments of intensly deep thought he concludes it better to be the one doing the fucking and whimpers "I'll be daddy".

"Good" rumbles Bubba. "Now come over here and suck mommies cock".
If a physicist named Lebowski discovered a particle, what would it be called? The "L deuterino", if he wasn't into the whole brevity thing.
My friend told me that I didn't know the meaning of the word "ironic"... ...which was ironic, because we were at the train station.
I work in the hole punching business. You can call me at 1-800-448-2-463. I always leave a good first impression!


PS. I work for a printer\publisher and thought of this one while I was punching holes today.  I hope the punchline isn't too convoluted.  
So a church had a kitchen fire... the fire alarm had gone off and everyone was evacuating the building.

Everyone evacuated safely and calmly but the fire was so immense that the whole front section was burning not very quickly. 

The cross that the church had constructed out of wood was the only piece of wood on the exterior of the building near the front other than the doors and was quickly blazing.

The story was in the paper the next day.

A reader of the paper jokingly said.
"At least nobody was ON this cross." 


Edit: Wording

A Man Walks into a Zoo He walked around the entire zoo, but there was only one animal.

It's a Shih tzu. 
I tried to take a picture of some fog...  I mist.




^I'll^see^myself^out^BYE!
I had 5 E's last night Shittiest scrabble hand I've ever had. 
Who sell the products cheaper – a manufacturer or a distributor? The store guard.
Why did the iPhone 7 cross the road? To buy another pair of AirPods. 
A Jewish boy asks his father for $20 Jewish boy: dad can I please have 20 dollars? 

Jewish dad: 10 dollars?!? What do you need 5 dollars for?
Don't read "part a" backwards. It's a trap.
What singer-songwriter got his start as a shepherd? Ed Shearin' 
So I walked into an apple phone store... And I farted, the people working there got mad at me and I said,"it's not my fault you don't have any windows" 

Backwards Compatibility. People hated on the new console generation because they weren't backwards compatible, the Internet practically crucified Sony and Microsoft. But really people have always been like this.

Did you see what they did to that Jesus guy when he announced Christianity was no longer backwards compatible with Judaism?
So here´s this kid who wants to buy condoms. Kid: I would like to purchase these condoms.

Cashier: Aren´t you too young for this?

Kid: No...

Cashier: How old are you?

Kid: 11

Cashier: What are you going to use those for?

Kid: I want to protect my skin.







^^^^Forgive ^^^^me
A man walks into a bar A man walks into a bar and treads in a massive dog shit, annoyed he orders himself a drink. Another man walks into the bar and steps in the same giant shit. The first man says "I did that' the second man grabs him by the neck and rubs his nose in it. 
I was looking at some fetish porn on my phone... I came upon it by accident.
Told my Doctor I have loose motions he told me not to loose shit over it. 
How can you tell a vegan from Texas vapes? I don't know the punchline.
I had to take my son's dirty diaper off today. I don't know why I was wearing it in the first place.
My friend told me he broke my lamp He said I hope you're not mad.
No, im delighted
An Englishman and a Frenchman are walking through the desert... When to nobodies real surprise a genie appears and offers to grant them a wish each.

The Frenchman goes first. "I would like to be transported back to my wonderful muzzer country, where you will 'ave built a great wall around all ze borders to protect ze beautiful 'omeland of ze French master race from ze filthy foreigners."

And poof, the genie grants his wish and the Frenchman is gone.

The Englishman says "Tell me more about this wall."

The genie responds "Well it's five hundred feet high, two hundred feet thick and absolutely impenetrable to any human force."

The Englishman says "Fill it with water."
A Man Gave Birth to a Baby Boy Today, The baby came out head first.
How to get out of buying your kids Christmas presents Explain to them that due to Global Warming that the North Pole melted and that Santa and the Reindeer drowned.
A sodium atom undergoes a vigorous reaction with flourine... How do you feel?" Asks the fluoride ion.

"Positively shell shocked" the sodium ion replied.
This is an old joke, but still kinda funny A native child entered his parents tent. "How did we get our names?" 

"Well" says the mother, " when your brother was conceived, we saw a deer running in front of us. So we named him running deer. We named your sister flying hawk, for the same reason."

Then, she turned her head.

"Why do you ask, Two Dogs Fucking?"
Why don't lamps talk? They're antisocial lights.
Is milk a good work out supplement? No, whey man.
My wife left a note on the fridge that said "This isn't working I'm going to my mom's." 
I opened up the fridge. The light was on and the beer was cold. I'm not sure what she was talking about.
How do you know if you've killed a vegan? They'll tell you.
The queen and a chicken go into a fancy restaurant... The queen tells the chicken to look away, and she orders a head of lettuce. The chicken wants to know what the queen got, but is only allowed to look After he orders. What's does the chicken order? Nothing but the chicken sees her salad.
why couldnt the pterodactyl learn the alphabet? Because it wasnt invented yet.

Kill me for this anitjoke
A black guy walks into a convenience store... ...and he buys a box of paper towels. He goes to cash it out and it comes up to $2.99. He sees the nametag on the cashier's shirt says "Arnold."

"Hey Arnold, sorry, I've only got a $20 dollar bill for this, haha."

"No problem" Arnold replies as he rings him up. Arnold hands him a $5 dollar bill as change.

"I think the change should be $17.01, no?" He asks.

"No, you're mistaken," Arnold replies. "I'm Arnold Schwarzenegger".

My wife and i decided not to have kids. The kids are taking it pretty hard...
You guys hear about that new broom that came out? It's sweeping the nation!
The story of Tyrone When he was in school none of his classmates liked him because of his stupidity and clumsiness.  However, no one disliked him as much as his teacher who was always telling him, "You're driving me crazy, Tyrone!"

One day Tyrone's mother came to the school to check on her son, and his teacher told her that he was a disaster, always had bad grades, and was probably the dumbest kid she ever taught.  Tyrone's mother was so furious she removed Tyrone from the Detroit school and they moved to Cleveland.

25 years later, the teacher was diagnosed with an almost incurable cardiac disease.  All of her doctors advised her that she needed heart surgery, but the only one able to do it was a doctor in Cleveland.  Since she had no other options she decided to have the operation and it was successful.

When she opened her eyes she saw a handsome young doctor smiling down at her. She wanted to thank him, but she couldn't talk.  Her face started to turn blue, and she raised her hand as if she was trying to tell the doctor something but quickly died.  

The doctor was shocked and wondered what went wrong so suddenly.  Then he turned around and saw our friend Tyrone, the janitor at the clinic, who had unplugged her life support equipment in order to connect his vacuum cleaner.

You seriously didn't think Tyrone was the doctor did you?
They planned the date when the Burj Khalifa would be finished in advance... They wanted to know when it'd be due by
If anyone has a good fishing pun... Let minnow.
What do you call a disabled Valedictorian? Invaledictorian 
I'll tell ya, Marylin Monroe... Was a true laydie.
A soldier survived mustard gas in battle, and then pepper spray by the police He's now a seasoned veteran.
My dad was an illiterate pirate 
Tragically, he was lost at C.
Why Hello! Thanks for calling the Mental Health Hotline! If you are obsessive-compulsive, press 1 repeatedly.

If you are co-dependent, please ask someone to press 2 for you.

If you have multiple personalities, press 3, 4, 5 and 6.

If you are paranoid, we know who you are and what you want. Stay on the line so we can trace your call.

If you are delusional, press 7 and your call will be transferred to the mother ship.

If you are schizophrenic, listen carefully and a small voice will tell you which number to press.

If you are manic-depressive, it doesn't matter which number you press - no one will answer.

If you are dyslexic, press 96969696969696.

If you have a nervous disorder, please fidget with the hash key until a representative comes on line.

If you have amnesia press 8 and state your name, address, phone number, date of birth, social security number and your mother's maiden name.

If you have post-traumatic stress disorder, slowly and carefully press 000.

If you have bi-polar disorder, please leave a message after the beep or before the beep. Or after the beep. Please wait for the beep.

If you have short-term memory loss, press 9. If you have short-term memory loss, press 9. If you have short-term memory loss, press 9. If you have short-term memory loss, press 9.

If you have low self esteem, please hang up. All our operators are too busy to talk to you
,,,,, chameleon
What do women and computers have in common? What do women and computers have in common?  You don't appreciate them until they go down on you.  
What does the Rose iphone 7 and the Titanic have in common? They both lost Jack.
A sadist and a masochist... A masochist once asked a sadist to slap him. The sadist said no. 
Why are hurricanes named with female names? Because when they come, they are wet and wild and when they leave they take your house and car with them. 
Young woman goes to the doctor complaining of chest pains ...big breaths said the doctor as he placed his stethoscope ...yeth she says and I'm only thixteen
A horse walks into a bar... Bartender asks 'Why the long face?'.
What do seal hunters and teens have in common? They both love clubbin'
Why did the Mexican take Xanax? For Hispanic attacks.
Hole in the wall A man is waiting for a bus, but really needs a piss. He looks around but can't see anywhere. Just then he noticed 3 small holes in the wall behind the bus stop. He walks over to the wall unzips his fly, pops his cock through one of the holes and starts to piss. 
Suddenly he feels a sharp pain in his cock and hears a voice "$5 or I'll cut your cock off" he looks over the wall and sees 3 kids lined up, one by each hole, with one of them holding a knife to his cock. "$5 or I'll cut you cock off" the man promptly agrees and hands over $5. "Put it in the bucket" the kid says and the man dropped the money into the bucket. "That's quite a scam you got going there kid" says the man "how much money have you made?" The kid says "$65" the man turns to the next kid "you?" "$70" says the second boy lifting up his bucket to show the man. He turns to the third boy "how much have you made? "The boy looks at the man with sadness on his face "just $5" he says "but on the plus side I have got a bucket full of cocks".
How cowboys are made "Dad?"

"Yes, son?"

"Where do Cowboys come from?"

"Well, son. When a cow and a boy love each other very, very much..."
I had a friend buy a European car and he kept telling me about it breaking down. I had to tell him that I didn't want to hear anymore of his Saab stories. 
It's the RoboShowdown! Deep Blue opens e4. Watson responds, "What is 'Chess'?"
You can tell a lot about a woman based on her voice. If she's moaning, she probably likes you. PROBABLY.
Kiss me I'm... ImpoveRISHed
An executioner started to feel paranoid when his axe told him: Don't get a head of yourself. 
Why do telescopes like the Moon so much? Because they find him very down to earth. 
Captain Picard runs a holodeck simulation where he has to stop a runaway train carrying corn and potatoes. If he doesn't stop it then it will be a Starch Wreck.
There are two kinds of people in the world: 
Those that can extrapolate from missing information.
What do you call the belief that one kind of shoe is better than another? Shoepremacy.
Two blondes are running for the highest office in the land Oh right, don't put the joke in the title.  Sorry.
I got a tattoo of a gong Because I heard it's cool to get a tattoo of a Chinese cymbal
Canadians are easy to identify ... ... you can spot them 1.6 kilometres away. 
What did one cell say to his sister cell who stepped on his toe? Mitosis.
The evil Herbs & Spices organization has assembled their last member and has finally taken over the world... It was only a matter of Thyme.
A Man Got On A Plane... A man gets on a plane with six children.  A woman leans across the aisle and asks "Are all those children yours?"  He answers, "No, I work for a condom company.  These are customer complaints."
I hate it when my teachers hit on me. It sucks being homeschooled.
What do you call a truly dedicated Catholic monk? A deep fryer.
A man walks into a bar... and sees 2 women drinking.

He asks: "Are you two from Scotland?"

They reply "It's WALES you idiot!"

He says: "Sorry, are you two women from Wales?"

They say "Yes" because this isn't a repost.
What do you call a porno that involves incest, biology and foot fetishes? Suck Mitosis
What do you get when you cross the Atlantic Ocean with the Titanic? Halfway
Woman goes to the doctor..... A woman goes the doctor and the doctor asks "what's wrong?" 
"Well..." replied the woman "something is strange when anyone touches my breasts it's quite frightening!" 
"Let me have a look" and with that the doctor touches the woman's right breast. 
At that moment out pops a black man from between her cleavage who pulls a funny face, screams all silly like, then disappears back between her breasts. 
"Oh my!" Says the doctor and with that touches the left breast. 
Out pops the black man man again from between her cleavage and pulls an even siller funny face, screams even louder, then disappears back between her breasts again. 
"Oh doctor what's wrong with me!" Asks the woman. 
"It's OK not as serious as you think." Replies the doctor "you just have some silly coon implants...."
What do you call a letter from a feminist? Hate male. 
All in a night’s work A guy meets a sex worker in a bar. 

She says, ‘This is your lucky night. I’ve got a special game for you. I’ll do absolutely anything you want for £300 as long as you can say it in three words.’ 

The guy replies, ‘Hey, why not?’ He pulls his wallet out of his pocket and lays £300 on the bar, and says slowly. 

‘Paint…my….house.’


What do you call a belly button in charge? A Navel officer...
A member of ISIS accidentally blew himself up... Well, Ji-had it coming.
Here's the thing about steak puns... ...they are a rare medium well done.
What's the difference between harass & annoy? I cant stick my dick in annoy
Name a famous explorer "Name a famous explorer that has been forgotten", asked my son

"Internet explorer.", I replied.
What's the difference between a crosswalk and your therapist's couch? Lay down in a crosswalk long enough and someone will come around to solve all your life problems for you.
Interviewer: Tell me something about yourself? Interviewer: Tell me something about yourself?
Me: Yourself is a pronoun.
*Kicked out*
Ford Ibble A car salesman asked me, "What are you looking for in a car?"

I said, "It has to be affordable"

He said, "I'm sorry sir, I've never heard of a Ford Ibble."
My wife's angry My wife's not talking to me because she said I've ruined her favourite dress.

I had to use something to sheet over my new car.
Did you hear about the South Carolina redneck who passed away and left his entire estate in trust for his beloved widow? She can't touch it until she's fourteen.
How many rednecks does it take to eat a 'possum? Two. One to eat and one to watch for traffic.
I just explained Google to my Granny. 
"Pick anything to search for" I told her. 
"What about a nice cream pie?" She asked.

"Except that." I replied.
Two old women were talking... One old woman says to another. 
"How do you know when to put the washing on the line, you do it perfectly," 

The other woman replies
"Its my husband, if his penis hangs to the left, it will be sunny, if it hangs to the right. Its gonna rain."

Out of curiosity, the first woman says,
"What if it's standing right up?"

The woman responded,
"Silly woman, on days like that you don't do the washing!"
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. A woman goes to the doctor. “Doctor,” she says, “I’m worried about my husband. He’s started doing this whole Dr. Jekyll/Mr. Hyde thing. I’ve tried talking to him about it, but he won’t listen. When he’s normal he denies there’s a problem. When he’s being ‘Mr. Hyde’…well, you can imagine! There’s just no talking to him at all!”

The Doctor tells her to calm down, “I’ve seen this a number of times and the treatment is pretty simple. He’ll have to start masturbating regularly.”

“Masturbating? But Doctor, what kind of answer it that? What does that answer have to do with my husband’s problem?” the wife asked.

“Well you see,” the Doctor replied, “in these cases I’ve found that usually the patient just isn’t feeling himself!”
What kind of shoes do girls who love pumpkin spice lattes wear? bAsics
Why doesn't Elin Nordegren ever shop at the fish market? Because Tiger is always bringing home crabs! 
What did the Syrian mother say about her child? They blow up so fast
Did you hear about the constipated mathematician? He had to work it out with a pencil.
Socialism or Communism are the only path to evolution, and Capitalism is the root of all evil. > Sent from my iPhone 7
French, Italian and Russian are talking about their sex lives French says: "When I get down with my woman, I can get her satisfied. I just slowly undress her latest Parisian fashion garments, and softly whisper of all the dirty things I will do to her. When I get going, she screams all night."

Italian replies: "That's nothing. When my lady and I start to make love, I gently sing her the most beautiful Venetian serenades I know. Then I coat her with the sweetest Sicilian honey, and lick it all off with my tongue. My lady, she screams all night, the next day, and the following evening too."

Russian snorts: "You think you know women, but you know nothing of women. When I feel like it, I just fuck my bitch of a wife, missionary style. After I'm done, I take our fine silk curtain from St. Petersburg, and wipe my dick on it. She screams all month."
My brother just admitted that he broke my favourite lamp,  I’m not sure I’ll be able look at him in the same light ever again.
A guy was walking to a bar... A guy was walking to a bar and on his way he found a girl tied up to the railroad tracks. He untied her and they had sex. Guy gets to the bar, friends ask why he's so late, tells them about the girl he found and all the different positions they fucked in. Friends give him props and ask if he got head, guy replies "I couldn't find it."
What do you get when your medieval court singers are off key? Minstrel cramps.
What do you call a stinky pianist with a penchant for both crime and dissonance? [OC] Felonious Skunk
Who are the world's fastest readers? 9/11 victims they got through 63 stories in 10 seconds.
My neighborhood barber just got arrested for selling drugs... 
I've been his customer for 6 years. 

I had no idea he was a barber.
I was going to write a joke about taps... ...but I didn't want to faucet.
Just read a book about Stockholm Syndrome. 
The first few chapters were awful, but by the end I loved it.
Three couples go to join a church.... Three couples want to join a church, so they each walk in and talk to the pastor. The pastor replies to their inquiry, "To prove you are a valuable member of the clergy I want you to commit to three months of abstinence to show your commitment to the church." The couples agree and go on their way to prove their faith. 

Three months later the couples return to the church and meet with the pastor. The pastor asks about their challenge, to which the first couples wife says, "We did it! We can't wait to be a part of the church!" "Welcome to the church!" Replies the pastor, "How about you guys?" He says to the second couple. The husband replies, "Well it was really difficult these last few days, but we pulled through for the good of the church!" "Welcome to the church!" The pastor replies again. "And you?" He gestures to the final couple. The husband hangs his head and says, "Well we almost made it, but two days ago, my wife dropped a frozen pizza and bent over in front of me to pick it up and I just lost it and couldn't hold out any longer." The priest, mildly shocked, replies, "I'm sorry, but you aren't welcome in this church." The husband shrugs and says, "That's OK, we aren't welcome in Safeway either."
A Blond runs into a crowded bar A blond runs into a crowded bar shouting to everybody "26 days! 26 days! Drinks on me!" 

The patrons at the bar all cheer for the blond and the bartender pours everybody a drink. A few minutes later the blond again shouts "26 days! 26 days! Drinks on me!". Again, cheering is heard by everybody at the bar and the bartender pours everybody their second free drink.

Once again after a few minutes the blond starts with the shouting "26 days! 26 days! Drinks on me!" 

At this point the bartender is beyond curious about what 26 days means, and he's also very concerned that the blond won't be able to afford 3 rounds of drinks for this crowded bar. So he decides he had better ask her what she means before he pours another round for the entire bar.

Bartender - "Ma'am, I'm dying to know. What does 26 days mean? And why are you buying rounds of drinks to celebrate it?" 

Blond - "Tonight is a night of wonder and celebration! I finished a puzzle tonight. On the box it said 3 years and up, but I finished it in 26 days!"
My wife caught me crossdressing. 
So I packed her things and left.

Bill has worked in a pickle factory for several years. One day he confesses to his wife... ...that he has a terrible urge to stick his penis into the pickle slicer.  His wife suggests that he see a therapist to talk about it, but Bill vows to overcome this rash desire on his own. A few weeks later, Bill returns home absolutely ashen.  His wife asks, "What's wrong, Bill?" "Do you remember how I told you about my tremendous urge to put my penis into the pickle slicer?" His wife gasps, "My God, Bill, what happened?" "I got fired." "No, Bill I mean, what happened with the pickle slicer?" "Oh, um, she got fired, too."
If weed becomes legalized after Snoop Dog dies He'll be rolling in his grave
Chernobyl I can count the number of times I've been to Chernobyl on one hand.

It's seven.
How Shit Happens. In the beginning was the plan 

And then came the assumptions 

And the assumptions were without form 

And the plan was completely without substance 

And the darkness was upon the face of workers 

And they spoke among themselves, saying "It is a crock of shit and it stinketh."

And the workers went upon their supervisors and sayeth, "It is a pail of dung and none may abide the odor thereof." 

And the supervisors went unto their managers and sayeth unto them "It is a container of excrement and it is very strong, such that none may abide by it."

And the managers went unto their directors and sayeth, "It is a vessel of fertilizer, none may abide its strength." 

And the directors spoke amongst themselves, saying one to another, "It contains that which aid plant growth, and it is very strong." 

And the directors went unto the vice presidents and sayeth unto them, "It promotes growth and is exceedingly powerful."

And the vice presidents went unto the president and sayeth unto him, "This new plan will actively promote the growth and efficiency of this company, and these areas in particular."
 
And the president looked upon the plan, 

And saw that it was good, and the plan became policy.

And this is how shit happens
My friend is afraid of fruit. So I told him to grow a pear. 
I really want to quit my job and follow my dreams of becoming a lapidary... But I just don't have the stones to do it.
The New Apple Card Deck only has 48 Cards They left out the jacks
How does a Bat Girl become a Bat Woman? She has a Bat Mitzvah
Will He Grow Up to be Gay? I wonder if you can predict if a kid will grow up to be gay by observing his early development.

I know some parents who are really concerned 'coz when their 4 year old plays with his wooden puzzle, he keeps trying to shove the cylinder into the star shaped hole.
What is a programmers favorite brand of ice cream? Häagen-DOS
Why did the Mexican take Xanax? For Hispanic attacks 
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MEN AND WOMEN Names
===========
If Linda, Kate, Paula and Janice go out for lunch, they will call each other Linda, Kate, Paula and Janice.
If Fred, Luke, Bradley, and Jeff go out, they will affectionately refer to each other as Bruno, Scrappy, Peanut-Head and Godzilla.

Eating Out
===========
When the bill arrives, Fred, Luke, Bradley, and Jeff will each throw in $20, even though the total is only $34.25. None of them will have any smaller bills and none will admit they want change back.
When Linda, Kate, Paula and Janice get their bill, out come the 
pocket calculators.

Money
===========
A man will pay $10 for a $5 item he needs.
A woman will pay $5 for a $10 item that she doesn’t need, because it’s on sale.

Bathrooms
===========
A man has five items in his bathroom: a toothbrush, razor, shaving cream, a bar of soap, and a towel from the Motel 6.
The average number of items in a woman’s bathroom is 284. The average man would not be able to identify most of them.

Arguments
===========
Women always have the last word in an argument.
Anything a man adds after that is the beginning of a new argument.

Cats
===========
Women love cats.
Men may say they love cats, but when women are not looking, will men kick cats.

The Future
===========
A woman worries about the future — until she gets a husband.
A man never worries about the future — until he gets a wife.

Success
===========
A successful man is one who makes more money than can be spent by his wife.
A successful woman is one who can find that a man.

Marriage
===========
A woman marries a man expecting he will change, but he doesn’t.
A man marries a woman expecting that she won’t change, and she does.

Dressing Up
===========
A woman will dress up when she goes shopping, empties the garbage, answers the phone, waters the plants, gets the mail and reads a book.
A man will dress up for weddings and funerals.

Natural
===========
Men wake up looking as good as when they went to bed.
Women will somehow deteriorate during the night.

Children
===========
A woman knows all about her children. She knows about their best friends, romances, secret hopes and dreams, favorite foods, fears and dental appointments.
A man is vaguely aware of some short people living in the house.

Maturity
===========
Women mature much faster than men. Most 17-year old females can function as adults. Most 17-year old males are still trading baseball cards and giving each other wedgies after gym class. This is why high school romances rarely work out.

Handwriting
===========
To their credit, men do not decorate their penmanship. They just chicken-scratch. Women use scented, colored stationary and they dot their “i’s” with circles and hearts. Women use ridiculously large loops in their “p’s” and “g’s”. It is a royal pain to read a note from a woman. Even when she’s dumping you, she’ll put a smiley face at the end of the note.

Groceries
===========
A woman makes a list of things she needs and then goes out to the store and buys these things. A man waits till the only items left in his fridge are half a lime and a beer. Then he goes grocery shopping. He buys everything that looks good. By the time a man reaches the checkout counter, his cart is packed tighter than the Clampett’s car on Beverly Hillbillies. Of course, this will not stop him from going to the 12-items-or-less lane.

Going Out
===========
When a man says he is ready to go out, it means he is ready to go out. When a woman says she is ready to go out, it means she WILL be ready to go out, as soon as she finds her earrings and finishes putting on her makeup.

Low Blows
===========
Let’s say a man and a woman are watching a boxing match on TV. One of the boxers is felled by a low blow. The woman says, “Oh, gee. That must have hurt.” The man groans and doubles over, and actually FEELS the pain.

Laundry
===========
Women do laundry every couple of days. A man will wear every article of clothing he owns, including his surgical pants that were hip about eight years ago, before he will do his laundry. When he is finally out of clothes, he will wear a dirty sweatshirt inside out, rent a U-Haul and take his mountain of clothes to the laundromat. Men always expect to meet beautiful women at the laundromat.

The Wedding
===========
When reminiscing about weddings, women talk about “the ceremony”. Men talk about “the bachelor party”.
Guy goes to the Doctor . . . "Doc, you gotta help me; I slept with an ugly woman last week, and ever since then my wrinkly bits have been aching. The only thing that seems to help is Aspirin."


"Hmm, 81 or 325?"


"Nah, she was closer to 210-220 pounds."
What do you do when you see a black man lying on the floor? You stop laughing and shoot him again.
A nurse finds a rectal thermometer in her pocket..... and thinks, "some asshole has my pen"
What brand of computer is best at singing? A Dell
Why did Adele cross the road? To say hello from the otherside! 

A male patient is lying in bed in the hospital, wearing an oxygen mask over his mouth and nose, still heavily sedated from a difficult surgery. A young, student nurse appears to give him a partial spongebath. 

“Nurse”, he mumbles, from behind the mask. “Are my testicles black?”

Embarrassed, the young nurse replies, “I don’t know, Sir. I’m only here to wash your upper body and feet.” 

He struggles to ask again, “Nurse, are my testicles black?” 

Concerned that he may elevate his vitals from worry about his testicles, she overcomes her embarrassment and sheepishly pulls back the covers. She raises his gown, holds his penis in one hand and his testicles in the other. She takes a close look and says, “There’s nothing wrong with them, Sir!”

The man pulls off his oxygen mask, smiles at her and says very slowly ,”Thank you very much. That was wonderful, but, listen very, very closely… "A r e –  m y – t e s t – r e s u l t s – b a c k?"
A recent survey revealed that computer science majors prefer the metric system. They're pro-grams.
A Werewolf: A Very astute wolf
An economist and a stock trader are talking a random walk down Wall Street The trader spots a fresh $100 bill, "Oh look! A $100!" he exclaims as a reaches down to pick it up. But the economist stops him, "No wait, that's a fake $100." "But how do you know?" the trader replies. The economist replies haughtily, "Because if that were a real $100, someone would have already picked it up"

Then the trader said "I'll bet you a billion dollars it's real, and give you 10 thousand to one odds."

The economist calculated the EV and accepted the bet.

The trader picked up the bill, but when he turned it over, the face on the bill was of the wrong man. That man was Albert Einstein.

At that moment, a black swan descended from the sky and landed on the economist's shoulder and shed a single tear.

Fortunately, Barack Obama appeared with a bag of $10 Trillion in taxpayer money to bail out the trader and everyone laughed and cheered and high-fived each other.
My son said, "Do you ever look at yourself in the mirror and think, 'My life has been a complete failure.'?" I said, "Not unless you're standing behind me."
What do you call a folder of child pornography? A pedo-file.
Gravity reminds me of my ex.... I hate it a lot
Why do Muslim women not say amen? Cause they say awoman.
If Adele were a Muslim, she would probably sing "Assalamualaikum from the other side"
Being with a whore.... Is like sitting on a warm toilet seat. You didn't see the last guy leave, but you know someone was just there.
My son said he couldn't sleep last night because of the thunder. I feel bad for locking him out now. 
A young boy and his father were watching a film together A young boy and his father were watching a film together. The young boy said to his father "Dad, i'm scared, is that lady going to die?"

The father thought for a second, and said, "Well son, based on the size of that horses penis, I'd say probably yes"
A guy wakes up, still hungover from the last night... He notices his wife is being super nice to him - she makes him breakfast in bed, asks him if he needs anything, hums to herself happily.

Confused, he asks his kid: "Psst, hey, what's going on?". 

The kid says: "Well, last night you came home drunk as a skunk, kicked the dog, vomited on the carpet, and pissed in the flower pot. And when mom tried to take off your clothes to put you to bed, you said - leave me alone bitch, I'm married!"
Here's the reason you're short, to all my short people. You're short because your dad tried to pull out. The rest of your height landed on the sheets.
A Job For a Woman The CIA has three candidates, two men and a woman, for one assassin position. On the final day of testing, the CIA proctor leads the first male candidate to a large steel door and hands him a gun.  

"We must know that you will follow our instructions, regardless of the circumstances," he explains.  

"Inside this room, you will find your wife sitting in a chair. Take this gun and kill her." The man is horrified, "You can't be serious! I could never shoot my wife!" "Well," says the proctor, "you're definitely not the right man for this job then." 

The CIA proctor leads the second male candidate to another large steel door and hands him a gun.  "We must know that you will follow instructions, no matter what the circumstances," the proctor explains.  "Inside this room, you will find your wife sitting in a chair. Take this gun and kill her." The second man steadies himself, takes the gun and enters the room.  After three quiet minutes, the man exits the room with tears in his eyes.  "I wanted to do it I just couldn't pull the trigger and shoot my wife. I guess I'm not the right man for the job." 

Finally, the CIA proctor leads the female candidate to yet another large steel door and hands her a gun.  "We must be sure that you will follow instructions, no matter what the circumstances. Inside this room, you will find your husband sitting in a chair. Take this gun and kill him." 

The woman takes the gun, enters the room, and before the door even closes completely behind her, she's fired off six shots. Then all hell breaks loose behind the door cursing, screaming, crashing.  

Suddenly, all goes quiet. The door opens slowly, the woman exits, and wiping the sweat from her brow, she says, *"Did you guys know the gun was loaded with blanks? I had to beat the son of a bitch to death with the chair!"*
Float like a butterfly Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee, die in your sleep, like Muhammad Ali 
If my child is born disabled I promise to give them the greatest life possible at the orphanage 
A couple is walking in St. Petersburg Square on Christmas Eve when they feel a slight precipitation. "I think it's raining" says the man

"No, It's snowing" replies the woman

"How about we ask this Communist Officer here? He is always right!" exclaims the man."Officer Rudolph is it raining or snowing?"

"Definitely raining" Officer Rudolph replies before walking off.

The man turns to his wife with a smile and says "See, Rudolph the Red knows rain, dear."
Any salad can be a Caesar salad. If you stab it enough.
The Bear and the Rabbit Bear and a Rabbit are pooping by a tree in the forest. The bear is laying huge big brown eggs one after the after and the stink is rotten. The rabbit is pipping out little seed sized matter that barely breaks an odor. The bear turns to the rabbit and asks "Do you have the problem of poo sticking to your hair?" The rabbit says "No." So the bear picks him up and wipes his ass with him.
Why did the chicken cross the road? Because he wanted to.
We can't have sex... This guy went to a bar...long story short, he met this broad and they went back to his place. Before they got undressed to do the horizontal mambo, he said, "Listen, I'm sorry but I don't think we should have sex right away". "Why's that?" she said.

"Well you see, I'm hung like a baby, and I wouldn't want you to laugh and decide you didn't want to have sex with me. Why don't we get to know each other first, and then when we feel we're ready, we'll do it."

So the girl agreed, but only because he was a good-looking dude and pretty nice.

Several dates later, they make it back to his place again, and after some conversation, they decide it's time. She undresses and slides into bed. He undresses, pulls out his dick, and slams it onto the bed with a thunderous noise.

She stares at his gigantic dick, in complete shock and awe.

"B-b-but I thought you said you were hung like a baby?"

"I am," he replied. "8 lbs, 14 and 1/2 inches."
What is the biggest battery size? The D. It's huge.
What do you call a very small villain? The Antagonist
When it comes to using figurative language, I always fly by the seat of my car. 
White house What do you call someone in the White House who is honest, ethical, intellectual, law abiding, and truthful?
A tourist.
There was a knock at my door. I said, "Who is it?" and they told me that it was the police. I asked them what they wanted and they said that they wanted to investigate my property for marijuana.

I said, "I haven't got any. Now be on your way."

"Well then," they said, "what harm is there in us checking?"

I said, "Because you might find the cocaine."
Did you know that Iceland... ...is only one sea away from Ireland?
A gaggle of geese, a brood of hens, what do you call a group of turkeys? A corporation.
2 men go for a job interview Two men go for a job interview, they are both doing really well and the interviewer can't decide between the men. He tells them both to leave the room and one by one they'll be called in and given a word that they must put into a sentence. 
First guy is called in and is told his word is great, so he thinks for a minute and then says 'I've got a donkey jacket and it fits just great' 
Interviewer is happy and says he's done well. 
He leaves the room and the second guy asks what his word was 'they asked me to use the word great' second guy asks 'well, what did you say?' 'I said, I've got a donkey jacket and it fits just great'. 
They give each other reassurances and second guy is called into the room and is told his word is fascinate. So he stands for a moment and thinks, then, after a minute he says 'I've got a donkey jacket and it fits just great, it's got nine buttons but I only fascinate!' 
Why are divorces so expensive? Because they're worth it. 
A man slams a tequila shot and jumps out the window... He was preparing for his last moments
What rhymes with orange? It doesn't !

Credit to Jimmy Carr
What does Trump call his immigration plan? Order 66.
Exaggerations... ...went up by a million percent last year.
What do you call someone who breaks a plate and then apologizes? Dishrespectful...
Drunk man takes a piss at the back of the bar. Bartender sees the man taking a piss*  
Bartender: Oi! The fuck you doing there.  
Drunk: Taking a piss.  
Bartender: Don't you know that's against the law?  
Drunk: No, I'm against the wall.
NSFW: What's the difference between jam and jelly? I can't jelly my dick up your ass. 
Irishman looking for a parking place Paddy was driving down the street in a sweat because he had an important meeting and couldn't find a parking place. Looking up to heaven he said, "Lord take pity on me. If you find me a parking place I will go to Mass every Sunday for the rest of me life and give up me Irish Whiskey!"
Miraculously, a parking place appeared.
Paddy looked up again and said, "Never mind, I found one."
I like my women like I like my bread Lots of yeast and taste kind of cheesy.
I like my beer like I like my neighbours White.
What do sex and The Big Issue have in common? (Original Joke) I buy them exclusively from homeless people 
What do they call the Hunger Games in France? Battle Royale with Cheese.
The flower pot men, Bill and Ben, walk into a Bar. "Flobadobdob" says Ben. Bill then says"Go home Ben, you're drunk". 
If you lower your expectations, you can never be disappointed... Lower them too far, and you'll end up in line for the new iPhone.
The San Francisco 49ers have been practicing a new play... Up by a few points with under a minute left in the game, with possession of the ball. Colin Kaepernick takes over at QB and play the Star Spangled Banner.
What do you call a artistic atomic nucleus? Quarky
Teacher: "OK Sarah, what's your sentence with contagious?" Student: "Our neighbour is painting his house with a 2 inch brush and my dad said it will take the contagious."

EDIT: Probably should have checked to see if this was posted before instead of posting for the millionth time. 



A parkourist walks into a restaurant He sees 5 jars.
"What are those?"
The waiter says "Some are suger, Summersalt"
Down in Jackson, Mississippi, three boys arrived in school late. Down in Jackson, Mississippi, three boys arrived in school late. It was as late as10:00 a.m. They had been fishing. For their excuse they stated that they were delayed because of a flat tire. 
The teacher decided to give them a test immediately, so she had them seated apart from one another. She said, "This test will have only one question, and I will give you thirty seconds to put down your answer." 

The question was, "Which tire?
Why did the monkey fall out of the tree? Why did the monkey fall out of the tree?
Because it was dead.

Why did the second monkey fall out of the tree?
Because it was attached to the first monkey.

Why did the third monkey fall out of the tree?
Because it thought it was a game.
My wife just left me because i cant stop using double negatives. But in my opinion I haven't done nothing wrong.
Which rock band has 4 people but doesn't make music? Mount Rushmore
My girl asked me to make her feel special... ...so I got her a helmet and a box of crayons.
What mathematical cube can you cook with? A boolean cube!
AN ENGINEER, DOCTOR, AND PASTOR GOLFING A pastor, a doctor and an engineer were waiting one morning for a particularly slow group of golfers. 

Engineer: What's with these guys? We must have been waiting for 15 minutes! 

Doctor: I don't know, but I've never seen such ineptitude! 

Pastor: Hey, here comes the greens keeper. Let's have a word with him. [dramatic pause] Hi George. Say, what's with that group ahead of us? They're rather slow, aren't they? 

George: Oh, yes, that's a group of blind fire fighters. They lost their sight saving our clubhouse from a fire last year, so we always let them play for free anytime. 

The group was silent for a moment. 

Pastor: That's so sad. I think I will say a special prayer for them tonight. 

Doctor: Good idea. And I'm going to contact my ophthalmologist buddy and see if there's anything he can do for them. 

Engineer: Why can't these guys play at night? 


Someone stole my copy of Microsoft Word. Whoever stole my copy of Microsoft Word, I'll track you down. You have my Word. 

EDIT: I saw this on /r/puns and reposted it here. I Excel at reposting. 
If at first you don't succeed.. .. skydiving probably isn't for you anyway.
The Greatest Joke... ...Your Life. 
My uncle was finally arrested for smashing people over the head with paving slabs. He tried to get away with it... But there was concrete evidence. 
What's the difference between a prostitute and a drug addict? The prostitute can wash her crack and then use it again!
What is a businessman's favorite game? Call of Duty: Economic Warfare
What is ez to cook? CookEZ.
What do you call a dog who can do magic? A labracadabrador
Girlfriend told me she wanted to see our kids so I came in her eye
Why did the fox cross the road? Cause there was a billion fucking chickens on the other side.
Is it a bird? Is it a plane? Whatever it is, it's heading straight towards the World Trade Center...
"One man's trash is another man's treasure".. ..is a shitty way to tell a kid they're adopted
How many Donald Trumps does it take to screw in a light bulb? Just one to tell the three illegal immigrants he hired to do it.
You know how some dogs turn around several times before lying down and going to sleep? They must be watch dogs. That's how they unwind.
Where's the loneliest place on earth at? Hillary Clinton's vagina.
What happens when you mix human DNA with goat DNA? You get kicked out of the petting zoo.
Wanna Know What An Old Lady tastes like...? (NSFW) Just "Depends".
Big White Horse of the Prairies A little Indian boy asked his father, the big chief and witch doctor of the tribe, "Papa, why is it that we always have long names, while the white men have shorter names ~ Bill, Tex or Sam, for example?"

His father replied, "Look, son, our names represent a symbol, a sign, or a poem for our culture not like the white men, who live all together and repeat their names from generation to generation.

Also, it is part of our makeup that in spite of everything, we survive.

"For example, your sister's name is Small Romantic Moon Over The Lake, because on the night she was born, there was a beautiful moon reflected in the lake.

"Then there's your brother, Big White Horse of the Prairies, because he was born on a day that the big white horse who gallops over the prairies of the world appeared near our camp and is a symbol of our capacity to live and the life force of our people."

"It's very simple and easy to understand."
"Do you have any other questions, Little Broken Condom Made in China?"
Three words to ruin a man's ego...?  "Is it in?"
Healthy human blood must be a low-carb meal... Because it's the most-keto diet.
Management Training An Indian warrior walks into Starbucks with a shotgun in one hand pulling a male buffalo with the other.

He says to the waiter, "Me want coffee."

The waiter says, "Sure chief coming right up."

He gets the Indian a tall mug of coffee. The Indian drinks the coffee down in one gulp, turns and blasts the buffalo with the shotgun, causing parts of the animal to splatter everywhere, then just walks out.

The next morning the Indian returns. He has his shotgun in one hand pulling another male buffalo with the other. He walks up to the counter and says to the waiter, "Me want coffee."

The waiter says, "Whoa, Tonto! We're still cleaning up your mess from yesterday. What was all that about, anyway?"

The Indian smiles and proudly says, "Me training for upper management position: Come in, drink coffee, shoot the bull, leave mess for others to clean up, disappear for rest of day.

What's the Pope's favorite sandwich? Chimichurri-marinated chicken breast topped with provolone, “Holy Land” relish—chopped tomato, onion, cucumber, shallots, parsley, and garlic doused in a lemon vinaigrette—arugula, on a ciabatta roll.
Four guys break down in the middle of nowhere They set off walking to find help and come across an old decrepit Manor House.   
When they knock on the door a stunning, young, buxom, woman answers.   
The men ask if they can use the phone to call for a tow.   
She agrees and invites them in. They ring for a tow truck but are told one can't be sent till morning. So they ask to be put up for the night.  
Again she agrees but this time with a condition "none of you are to set foot in my cellar" the men accept.  
During the night the men get curious and decide to find out what's in the cellar.  
When they get down to the cellar and switch on the light they see row upon row of cocks hanging on the walls.  
The men bolt for the door and back to bed.  
When they wake up they're all back in the cellar tied to chairs, stark bollock naked. With the woman in front of them.   
"I told you not to come down here. Now I'm going to add you guys to my collection. Tell me your jobs and don't lie or I'll take more than your cocks." She says. 
The first man says "I'm a lumberjack" so she fetches a hatchet and off comes his cock. 
the other men are shocked but the fourth starts giggling.  
The second man says  "I'm a butcher" so she fetches a cleaver and off comes his cock. 
The fourth man is laughing fully now.  
The third man says "I-I-I'm a mason" so she fetches a hammer and chisel and his cock is added to the wall.  
The last man is in absolute hysterics 
"And what do YOU find so funny?" the woman demands.  
"I'm a gigalo"

(My first joke, sorry about the formatting I'm on my phone)
Green Leaf Salad! I called my Arab friend home for a traditional 'Onam Sadya' (traditional lunch).

The Arab friend asked me: Is the Onam lunch Veg or Non veg?

I told him: It's Vegetarian, are you coming?

He said he would come. And he came and sat for the 'Sadya' (lunch).

I placed the traditional big banana leaf and a glass of water in front of him to serve the Onam lunch, and went inside to bring the Onam meal.

When I came back, my Arab friend ate the big banana leaf and drank the water, and said: Masha Alla... Thamam... This is the first time I have ever eaten such a big leaf as 'Salad'...

Solution to overpopulation Professor : "Over population is a big problem in our country. A woman in India gives birth every minute!"

Student : "Somebody should stop her!!"
Man walks into taxidermist. Asks a deer "you want a bite of my sandwich?" Deer replies "No thanks I'm STUFFED!"
Bring a Knife on a date? When I see lovers' names carved in a tree, I don't think it's sweet. I just think it's surprising how many people bring a knife on a date. 
What's darker than black, and rhymes with evil? Don Cheadle
A horse walks into a bar... ... and I quickly leave, realizing the danger of the situation
What do you call a police officer standing on dog poop? On duty
One day I was walking across the bridge when I saw a man about to jump off...  I immediately shouted to him, "Stop! Don't do it!"

"Why not?" he said.

I said, "Well, there's so much to live for!"

"Like what?"

"Well... are you religious or not?"

"I am!"

"Me too! Are you Christian or Jewish?"

"Christian."

"Me too! Are you Catholic or Protestant?"

"Protestant."

"Me too! Are you Episcopalian or Baptist?"

"Baptist."

"Wow! Me too! Are you Baptist Church of God or Baptist Church of the Lord?"

"Baptist Church of God."

"Me too! Are you Original Baptist Church of God, or are you Reformed Baptist Church of God?"

"Reformed Baptist Church of God."

"Me too! Are you Reformed Baptist Church of God, reformation of 1879, or Reformed Baptist Church of God, reformation of 1915?"

"Reformed Baptist Church of God, reformation of 1915!"

To this I replied, "Die, heretic scum!" and pushed him off.
A man and a woman are interviewing with the FBI After days of grueling physical and mental challenges, there remains just one more challenge.  The interviewer hands the man a gun and tells him to go into a nearby room and kill the person in there.

The man comes out a moment later, shaken.  Out of earshot of the woman, he tells the instructor "That was my wife in there!  How could you ask me to shoot her?  I could never do that!"  The instructor reaponds "Don't worry, the gun wasn't loaded.  We just wanted to make sure you're a thinker and not a killing machine."

The instructor hands the woman the gun and gives her the same instructions.  She goes into the room and for a moment there is silence, then a series of loud thuds punctuated by screaming.  She comes out a moment later, hair mussed up, panting and covered in blood.  She angrily tells the instructor "This gun isn't loaded you dumbass.  I had to beat my husband to death with the chair he was sitting in."
What do test tube babies do on mothers day and father's day? They cry 
Government Joke Once upon a time the government had a vast scrap yard in the middle of a desert. 

Congress said, "Someone may steal from it at night." So they created a night watchman position and hired a person for the job. 

Then Congress said, "How does the watchman do his job without instruction?" So they created a planning department and hired two people, one person to write the instructions, and one person to do time studies. 

Then Congress said, "How will we know the night watchman is doing his tasks correctly?" So they created the Quality Control Department and hired two people. One to do the studies and one to write the reports. 

Then Congress said, "How are these people going to get paid?" So they created a time keeper and a payroll officer position. Then hired two people. 

Then Congress said, "Who will be accountable for all of these people?" So they created an administrative section and hired three people: An Administrative Officer, Assistant Administrative Officer, and a Legal Secretary. 

Then Congress said, "We have had this command in operation for one year and we are $18,000 over budget, we must cutback overall cost." So they laid off the night watchman.


Bumblebees They already gave up on you, so they will

   Never gonna give you up.

They never carried you, so they will

   Never gonna let you down.

They have too short legs, they will

   Never gonna run around.

They did not sign a contract with you, so they will never leave you

   And desert you.
Why did the Priest cross the road? Because he crosses everything. 
Teacher: whoever answers my next question, can go home Teacher: whoever answers my next question, can go home.

One boy throws his bag out the window.

Teacher: who just threw that?

Boy: Me! I’m going home now.
What comes after L? Bow
Bumblebees They already gave up on you, so they will

   Never gonna give you up.

They never carried you, so they will

   Never gonna let you down.

They have too short legs, they will

   Never gonna run around.

They did not sign a contract with you, so they will never leave you

   And desert you.
A 63 years old billionaire marries a hot 27.6 year old girl.. After honeymoon they throw a party celebrating their marriage...
After a few drinks, billionaire's friends want to know the secret of how he landed 27.6 yo hottie..
"It's simple" billionaire boasts... "I faked my age"
"Yes, but even for a 40/45 years old guy...she is sensational, what age btw did you tell you are?" A friend asks.
With a smile on his lips billionaire responds "85 years old"
What do Hillbillies do for Halloween? Pump-kin.
Which Rapper has the whitest smile? Fluo Rida
Roses are grey, Violets are grey I'm a dog.
It was the night before the wife's 40th birthday So the man asked his wife what she'd like for her 40th birthday. "I'd love to be six again," she replied.

On the morning of her birthday, he got her up bright and early and off they went to a local theme park. What a day! He put her on every ride in the park: the Death Slide, the Screaming Loop, the Wall of Fear, everything there was! Wow! Five hours later she staggered out of the theme park, her head reeling and her stomach upside down. Right to a McDonald's they went, where her husband ordered her a Happy Meal along with extra fries and a refreshing chocolate shake. Then, it was off to a movie - the latest Disney and what a fabulous adventure!

Finally, she wobbled home with her husband and collapsed into bed. He leaned over and lovingly asked, "Well, dear, what was it like being six again?" 

One eye opened and she replied, "You idiot, I meant my dress size."
What do you get when a fat guy and a butterface have sex? A Burka!
He covers his body, and she covers her face!
the elevator business is great It has its ups and downs

Knock, knock. Who's there? Al Gore. Al Gore who? Are you kidding me? I invented the internet!
Yo Momma so Fat When she met Stevie Wonder backstage. He was like "Who brought a goddamned bouncy castle in here!" 
What is a traitor's favorite food? Eggs Benedict
The man who walked in shoes and then his shoes did the walking. Afterwards, he becomes King of Zanzibar. Part II Baron Skullcroft had been moseying through a meadow as he is wont to do after smoking a pipe of opium and masturbating onto a pile of writhing lepers.   

He had been wondering lately whether he could bring his dear deceased daddy back from the grave by way of dark sorcery.  Just then --
A knock knock knock on the 4th wall and Baron von Scullcroft Jr. rose pithily from a dandelion patch and shouted:

"Reader: do be alarmed, should you become engorged of the genitals at any point during this joke"

The Baron then strode down to the brothel where he purchased a package of crackers.  The Baron always bought his crackers from the brothel as the slight perfume of smoke and fuck married beautifully with the flavor of the wheat flour.

Later on, at an inn, the Baron came across an orphan boy and threw him a halfpence coin for the effort.  After finishing his dinner and wiping his own mouth, he then departed for The Capital where he had been called upon by his father, the Great Archduke Skullcroft Sr.  ..... To be continued .....
What do the Starship Enterprise and toilet paper have in common? They both circle Uranus looking for Klingons.
Two Problems with North Carolina: Too many racists, and too many GODDAMN ASIANS.
Duck, duck, duck... DEEZ NUTS! HA! GOT EEM
My neighbours really like Halloween They dress up as ghost every weekend and go out for lynch.
My boss is sending me abroad for a business trip next week. I hope she's a blonde.
What's the difference between KFC and /R/Jokes? What you get served at KFC is original. 
What does R. Kelly tell little girls on Halloween? Urine for a treat!
So apparently Daft Punk have been saying some iffy things regarding the holocaust.. I guess they're Nazi synthesizers
What do you call the moisture build-up between two cousins having sex? Relative humidity
Have you tried the new Mountain Dew flavor? ... Butthole blast.
A: DoublePlusGoo Q: What did Winston call the bukkake scene in 1984
What is the difference between Hillary Clinton and the hookers in downtown Little Rock? The hookers have real orgasms and fake diamonds.
A man walks into the library looking for a book... After looking around, he walks up to the front desk and asks

"Hey, I am looking for a book about micropenises but can't seem to find it."

The librarian responds

"I am sorry, I don't think it's in yet"

"That's the one!"
The iPhone doesn't have a headphone jack and the Samsung battery is exploding... It's like the mobile equivalent of our presidential election!
"I wish I had the money to buy a million watermelons..." "What will you do with a million watermelons?"

"I don't want the watermelons, I just want the money."
Where does Dracula keep his tools? The blood shed.
What's better than sex with all the lights off? Sex that isn't with your dad.
I must be emotionally constipated ...because I haven't given a shit in days 
Saturday is Batman Day, but every day can be Batman Day... If your parents are dead enough.
People always ask me why I procrastinate.. They say, "you know, the early bird gets the worm."

I just respond, "yes, but it's the second mouse that gets the cheese."
A woman and her husband were waiting for news of their unborn child and the doctor walks in... Doctor: So we got the results back from your ultrasound and the baby is-

Woman: Wait wait wait! Don't tell us the sex of the baby! We want it to be a surprise

Doctor: hehe... Well IT is not breathing...
A nacho enters the stomach A nacho enters the stomach, lays down near the duodenum and falls asleep. A chunk of pizza also arrives and falls asleep too. Then a shot of tequila joins and says: We're having such a party up there and you prefer to just sleep here? Get up, we're going back.
Why don't DJs make good pirates? They push buttons when they work the deck.


Gf told me this one this morning, wants to know what you think
What's the difference between a northern fairytale and a southern fairytale?  A northern fairytale begins "Once upon a time ..." A southern fairytale begins "Y'all ain't gonna believe this shit ..."
What is a fitting name for an arrogant mohel? Hugh Bris
I don't know if it's just morbid curiosity but... I'm dying to go to a cemetery!
Donation Request ----SENT FROM FORMER 3 STAR GENERAL, FORMER SENATOR, ROBERT WINGLASS ( AND CLASSMATE ) 

Dear Friends:
I have the distinguished honor of being a member of the Committee to raise $50,000,000 for a monument to Hillary R. Clinton. We originally wanted to put her on Mt. Rushmore until we discovered there was not enough room for her two faces.
We then decided to erect a statue of Hillary in the Washington, D.C. Hall of Fame. We were in a quandary as to where the statue should be placed. It was not proper to place it beside the statue of George Washington, who never told a lie, or beside Barack Hussein Obama, who never told the truth, since Hillary could never tell the difference.
We finally decided to place it beside Christopher Columbus, the greatest Democrat of them all. He left not knowing where he was going, and when he got there he did not know where he was. He returned not knowing where he had been, and did it all on someone else's money. 

Thank you, 
Hillary R. Clinton Monument Committee

P.S. The Committee has raised $2.16 so far.
My dad gave me $20 for lunch today I don't know why, a $5 note tastes the same.
I’m selling my talking parrot..... Why? Because yesterday, the bastard tried to sell me.
If you are at a restaurant and see the Pig Latin Admiral Ackbar special, beware.. It's an app tray.
People are giving Hillary too much flak for fainting I mean come on, it was 92 degrees out there, how can you expect an older women to withstand 102 degree heat. I'd like to see you give a speech in 112 degree heat and see if you can make it as far as her.
Missing Wife - Husband went to the sheriff's department to report that his wife was missing.
- Husband: My wife is missing. She went shopping yesterday and has not come home...
- Sergeant: What is her height?
- Husband: Gee, I'm not sure. A little over five-feet tall.
- Sergeant: Weight?
- Husband: Don't know. Not slim, not really fat.
- Sergeant: Color of eyes?
- Husband: Sort of brown I think. Never really noticed.
- Sergeant: Color of hair?
- Husband: Changes a couple times a year. Maybe dark brown now. I can’t remember.
- Sergeant: What was she wearing?
- Husband: Could have been pants, or maybe a skirt or shorts. I don't know exactly.
- Sergeant: What kind of car did she go in?
- Husband: She went in my truck.
- Sergeant: What kind of truck was it?
- Husband: A 2015 Ford F150 King Ranch 4X4 with eco-boost 5.0L V8 engine, special ordered with manual transmission and climate controlled air conditioning. It has a custom matching white cover for the bed, which has a matching aftermarket bed liner. Custom leather 6-way seats and "Bubba" floor mats. Trailer package with gold hitch and special wiring hook-ups. DVD with full GPS navigation, satellite radio receiver, 23-channel CB radio, six cup holders, a USB port, and four power outlets. I added special alloy wheels and off-road Michelin's. It has custom running boards and indirect wheel well lighting.
- At this point the husband started choking up.
- Sergeant: Don't worry buddy. We'll find your truck.
Hugh what?!? Hugh what!??! Hugh Rambe.
The breweries of the United States are planning to overthrow the government... It's a consbeeracy!
What shape has ape sides? A Harambus. 
An Indian Chief is sitting under a tree... An Indian Chief and his son are sitting under a tree, looking out over the plains when his son asks: "Father, why is sister named, Running Deer?"

Chief: "Because, my son, when she was being born I looked out of the teepee and saw a deer running." 

Son: "Father, why is brother called Charging Bull?" 

Chief: "Because my son, when he was being born I looked out of the teepee and saw a bull running. Why do you ask, Pooping Dog?
Jesus on the cross Jesus Christ is nailed to the cross and the disciples are gathered around, crying. 
Jesus calls to Peter, 

"Peter, come here!" 
Peter goes over to the cross, only to be hit by the roman guards. He stands up and wants to return to the other disciples and Jesus calls to him again.

"Peter, come here!"
So, again Peter tries to climb the cross to get to his lord, when the roman soldier draws his sword and says if Peter comes back they will but his arms and legs off. Peter is getting a little pissed and wants to go back to his buddies, but again Jesus summons. The guard can't believe that Peter is trying yet AGAIN to climb to the cross, and chops peters arms and legs off. Peter is now covered in blood and demented from the blow to the head and wants to call it a day. Jesus calls again. 

"Peter, please, come to me!" 
By now, the guard is tired of chopping limbs, so he lets Peter be. Peter climbs all the way up and after a long time he finally arrives at his Lord's side. Hurting, suffering, bleeding, Peter looks into the lord's eyes and asks, "yes, my Lord. What is it?" Jesus looks off into the distance, "Look Peter, I can see my house from here!"
I once met a girl with 3 boobs Everyone called her triceratits
I know we get a lot of dad jokes...here's a mom one What did Captain Picard say when he saw the new sewing machine?




Make it sew!
Have you guys heard the joke about Jonah Hill? Sorry, wrong subreddit. He should be taken seriously. Jonah Hill is no joke.
What's the smartest thing that ever came out of Einstein's wife's mouth? Einstein's dick.
Nice butts take my breath away... I’m assmatic.
What political group does Matthew McConaughey associate with? Alt-right alt-right alt-riiight
My wife wants pay equality.... I told her I would do 1 better and gave her $1 to mow the grass.
What's a kidnapper's favorite kind of shoes? White Vans
The S7's are exploding as much as Muslims in the middle east.
One thing wrong with the gene pool The problem with the gene pool is that there's no lifeguard. 
What do you call a 10' long reptile that can appear anywhere at anytime and always starts shit? An instant-gator. 

 I know. It's probably time to have some kids. 
What do you call an army of gorilla soldiers? Boko Harambe.
What do you call a hospital for squids A Squid-*Ward*
Alphabet Pick-up-line Me: You remind of the 20 letters of the alphabet 

Girl: There are 26 letters in the alphabet dumbass 

Me: Oh, I forgot to mention, U R A Q T 

Girl: That still only makes 25 . . . 

Me: Don't worry, I will give you that D later
You've heard this before. A few guys are drinking at a bar. They start talking about getting home and they are concerned their wives will be upset about how late they get home. 

First guy says, "I do what I can. I put the car in neutral at the driveway and coast in. I tiptoe inside and sneak into bed. But she still knows." 

Second guy said, "I idle a half block away, coast all the way home. I take off my shoes before I walk inside. I creep up the stairs and slink into bed but she is still there, waiting and as much as I do and starts yelling."

Third guy says," You're doing it wrong. I squeal my tires all the way into the driveway. I stomp to the front door, slam it closed, run up the stairs, slap my wife on the ass and yell, "who wants this?" and she is asleep every time. "
Why is a pool table green? If someone racked your balls, you'd be green too.
I bought a Molotov Cocktail today It was $850 and they called it the Note 7
First thing I do every morning when I wake up is take a shit. Then I roll over and get out of bed.
An Italian man and his wife had three children... The two oldest were playing football while the other slept indoors. The man said, "My love, are you sure Ricky is my son? His brothers are athletic but him...not so much."

"Yes, my love."

A decade later the oldest brothers graduated college, one becoming an engineer and the other a doctor. Ricky had dropped out and took a job at a fast food place. 

"My love, are you sure Ricardo is mine? His brothers are successful but him...not so much."

"Yes my love, he is yours."

Decades later, the wife was on her deathbed and said to her husband, "Benito, my love, I have a confession to make,"

"Is it about Ricky? Is he not mine?" He asked firmly.

"He is, my love, the other two...not so much."
What did the rooster say to his young chick when he kept stalling the car during his driving lessons. Cluck! Cluck! Fucking cluck damnit!
The first time I spent the night at my girlfriend's house, her father would not let us sleep together... ...which is a shame because he was very attractive.
John Cena wakes up ... **John Cena wakes up in a hospital**

John Cena: Where am I?

Nurse: ICU

John Cena: No you can't. 
A group of detectives did an investigation into the iPhone 7 They didn't find jack.
Make love for the first time..... A girl asks her boyfriend to come over Friday night to meet, and have dinner with her parents. Since this is such a big event, the girl announces to her boyfriend that after dinner, she would like to go out and make love for the first time.
The boy is ecstatic, but he has never had sex before, so he takes a trip to the pharmacist to get some condoms. He tells the pharmacist it's his first time and the pharmacist helps the boy for about an hour. He tells the boy everything there is to know about condoms and sex. At the register, the pharmacist asks the boy how many condoms he'd like to buy, a 3-pack, 10-pack, or family pack. The boy insists on the family pack because he thinks he will be rather busy, it being his first time and all.
That night, the boy shows up at the girl's parents house and meets his girlfriend at the door. "Oh, I'm so excited for you to meet my parents, come on in!"
The boy goes inside and is taken to the dinner table where the girl's parents are seated.
The boy quickly offers to say grace and bows his head. A minute passes, and the boy is still deep in prayer, with his head down.
10 minutes pass, and still no movement from the boy.
Finally, after 20 minutes with his head down, the girlfriend leans over and whispers to the boyfriend, "I had no idea you were this religious."
The boy turns, and whispers back, "I had no idea your father was the pharmacist!"
Damn Girl, Are You Harambe's Pit? Cause I wanna drop my children in you
What's the most eco friendly subreddit? /r/Jokes because over 90% is recycled garbage.
What kinda pet would John Wayne get?... He'd get a long little doggie.
What did the ship captain say when his son learned to float ? That's my buoy !
Rolling Stones vs Scottish Shepherd (NSFW) What to the Rolling Stones and a Scottish Shepherd have in common?

The Stones' sang "Hey you get off my cloud", the shepherd yells "Hey McCloud get off my EWE!"
What's the hardest thing of seeing a dead child in front of me? My penis.
How did Donald Trump earn his millions? He started with his dad's billions.
I ran a survey for Muslims And 9 out of 11 said they would fly a plane into a tower.

Bunch of adrenaline junkies!
How do you turn water into holy water? Ya boil the hell out of it...
I faked a cough to get out of work. I tell myself I wasn't lying... I was just being SARScastic.
What is green and has wheels ? Grass I lied about the wheels.
One day Jesus was strolling around... ...when he comes across a sad old man, searching something desperately. 
"What are you searching for old man?" He asks.
"My son." responds the old man.
Jesus tells the man that he will aid him in finding his son. But wanta more information: "Do you have any information about him? Anything specific, like, what does he look like?"
"Well," the old man says "he had nails in his hands and legs..."
Jesus is shocked.
"D...Dad?" He asks, his voice trembling.
The old man approaches Jesus, places his hands onto Jesus' cheeks. He asks:
"Pinnocio??"
What do doors and hookers have in common? You enter, come, and go.

EDIT: changed punchline
My wife told me that she isn't very happy with our sex life. A small part of me disagrees.
Someone with adrenaline in their pocket is usually one of two things. They are nuts, or they are allergic to nuts.
A man walks into a bar.... .....and sees a sign behind the bar, "free drinks for life if you can pass the three trails". Curious by this the man asks the bartender what the trails are.

"First you have to chug a fifth of fire water. Then we have an alligator with a sore tooth in the back and you have to remove the tooth. Lastly, we have a virgin upstairs and you have to sleep with her."

Giving it some thought he decides against it. As the night continues and liquid courage  begins to take effect be decides to try the trails. He begins to chug the fire water, tears streaming down his face. 

The bartender then brings him to the back room, after a few minutes horrible sounds eminent from the room and then silence. The man comes out the room and the bartender leads him upstairs. Again a few minutes pass and then horrific sounds come from upstairs. After a few minutes pass the man comes down with a look of pride upon his face.

"I drank your fire water, had sex with your alligator, and pulled the sore tooth from your virgin."
What do you call a blind deer? No eye deer
What options does an abortionist have to get ashore? Row vs. Wade
We were having dinner at the table. "What's up, dad?" I asked. "You look thoughtful."

He said, "I was just thinking about this time I got a blowjob off a girl at school. If only I could remember her name---"

"Peter!" interrupted mum.

He said, "No, that wasn't her name." 


Atheist Boyfriend A boy and a girl were dating and the results are bumpy. So, they decided to a date to decide the outcome....

During the date, the girl bursts out: Do you love me?

The boy replies: Sure, I love you as much as God himself!

The girl bursts out into tears....

The boy continues: I'm an atheist.

The girl storms off.
There are three monkeys One of the is holding a banana
Another one is holding a stick
The last one is holding nothing
Which is the smartest primate?

Ans:Human
I didn't think my son would make a good postman. But he delivered. 
The Energizer Bunny was arrested today... He was charged with battery.
Which wrestler's weakness is the rain? Dwayne Johnson
Why did the JavaScript programmer need glasses? Because he couldn't C#
Buying an iPhone Buying an iPhone is like buying a 24k gold plated turd. It shiny and worth a lot, but it's still a piece of shit. 
A young Native American brave goes up to the Chief He asks the Chief why indians have such funny names. 

"The day Soaring Eagle was born, a scouting party saw a majestic eagle flying high above the camp."

The young brave clapped his hands with delight.

The Chief continued wistfully, "A deer came splashing through the creek the day Running Deer was born."

The young brave giggled at the thought as the Chief spoke again. "Standing Bear was born on the day a great black bear rose onto its hind legs to see on top of a neighboring hill."

Scratching his head, the Chief queried the child, "Why do you ask, Two Dogs Fucking?"
Put the punchline in the title. How do you ruin a joke?

I'm jealous of clocks. They have all the time on their hands.
Want to hear a bad knock knock joke? Ding Dong
What is it called when you buy drapes over the phone? A curtain call. 
What do a gynecologist and a pizza delivery boy have in common? They both can smell it, but can't eat it
If pro is the opposite of con.. Then what is the opposite of progress? Congress.... Thank you George Carlin :)
Why did the old lady fall into the well? She didn't see that well
The worst mix of diseases? Alzheimer and diarrhea. You run but you don't remember where.
What did the Spanish Gorilla say at lunch time? Yo tengo Harambe.
Pinocchio goes to the doctor... and says "Doctor, I have recently started dating a girl. Now, it has been fun so far but she has started to complain about splinters. What can I do."

The doctor considers a moment and says "You should simply get a few different grades of sand paper and every morning apply a few strokes. This should clear up the splinters in no time."

Pinocchio thanks the doctor and heads off. A few months later Pinocchio returns for a regular checkup. During it the doctor asks "So, how have things been with your girlfriend?"

Pinocchio replied "Who needs a girlfriend?"
In the vegetable and fruit aisle Me: Hi, are these carrots genetically modified?
Clerk: No, why do you ask?
Carrot: Yeah, why do you ask?
I met two trannies at a bar one with a prosthetic leg One was named amanda the other ilene
This girl winked at me and said she wanted to go somewhere quiet. So I took her to the library. 
I like my women the same way I like my guns... Black and oily with a sensitive trigger.
What song did the iPhone 7 sing to the iPhone 6? Hit the road Jack!
A young blonde... ...pilot is in her first flying lesson in a 2 seater plane. Her instructor all of a sudden get a heart attack and dies.

"May day! May day! Help me! Help me! My instructor pilot is dead and I don't know how to fly!" 

She hears a voice over the radio saying, "This is Air Traffic control. We can hear you loud and clear. I will talk you through this and get you back on the ground safely. I have had a lot of experiences with this kind of problems. Now just take a deep breathe. Everything will be fine! Give me your height and position."

The blonde replies, "I'm 5'7 and in the front seat."

(After a long pause)

"O.K." says the the voice in the radio....."Now repeat after me.....Our Father Who art in heaven...."
You know you're old... When your stripper has braces and you're wondering how much her parents paid for them.
Why did the hippie drown? He was too far out!
how do you say poop in Chinese Boobs
Wanna hear a joke? Manchester united
What's white on top and black at the bottom? Society
My wife’s sexual fantasy is to be with another man. Mine is to have two girls at the same time. 
I think she misunderstood because now we have twin daughters from the mailman.
What is a joke on Windows 10? Privacy settings.
I find it ironic that the colors red, white and blue stand for freedom until they are flashing behind you
What would you call a very funny mountain? Hill Arious!
What's Black and sits at the top of the steps? Stephen Hawking after a house fire
A dyslexic man walks into.. .. A bra
Women can talk for hours... ...but from 5 minutes giving a blowjob their mouth hurts.
Why is ink an unwise investment? Because it's a dyeing industry.



- This is too obvious a joke to be original, but it came to me during my econ class, and so it's original to me!
True love lasts forever It’s the World Cup Final, and a man makes his way to his seat right next to the pitch. He sits down, noticing that the seat next to him is empty.

He leans over and asks his neighbour if someone will be sitting there. ‘No,’ says the neighbour. ‘The seat is empty.’ ‘This is incredible,’ said the man. 

‘Who in their right mind would have a seat like this for the Final and not use it?’ The neighbour says, ‘Well actually the seat belongs to me. I was supposed to come with my wife, but she passed away. This is the first World Cup Final we haven’t been to together since we got married.’ 

‘Oh, I’m so sorry to hear that. That’s terrible….But couldn’t you find someone else, a friend, relative or even a neighbour to take her seat?’ The man shakes his head. ‘No,’ he says. ‘They’re all at the funeral.’
Some Craziest Dumbest Statements When Mr. Romeo tells Miss Juliet that she's fat!

Well, he doesnt always use the internet, but when he does, he shares recipes and inspirational quotes. he is..the most pinteresting man in the world.

Crazy the only reason some people are starving and suffering in the world is because they aren't "so blessed".

Is there any jail just for people that don't break apart kit kats before they eat them.

My friends think that I got Right woman in my life but they don't yet know that she is 'Always Right'!
Dad with his son are watching a movie when a sex scene begins \-Son, leave the room please.

\-Dad, but I'm 23...

\-I don't give a fuck how old you are, you're not going to watch me jack off.
I should've properly tagged my jokes here as original So I could absolutely know the reason it gets down voted
Do you know a good lawyer? "Why do you need a lawyer?"

"I killed someone... with my bad jokes"


A man wanks into a bar... ...and the bartender says
"We don't serve your typo here"
What does Putin's boyfriend say when he wants sex? Putin, Putitin
Dental [Long][NSFW] A father stops to talk to his son before leaving the house forever. He says, "Son, I'm going to give you some advice that will serve you well throughout your life. Stay away from women. They are nothing but trouble.... Also, they have a hole between there legs with teeth. If you put anything in that hole, they will bite it off." With that remark, the father leaves.Years go by and the son grows up, falls in love and gets married. On his wedding night, his bride tries to get him to make love to her. She becomes exasperated and finally goes into detail about what is expected of him as a husband. Alarmed, the young man says, "No way am I putting my penis in there. You have teeth and you will bite me!" The wife says, "Calm down! Look here." She opens her legs and says, " Look closely. I don't have any teeth down here." The husband says, "You're right! And your gums are in terrible condition!"
TIFU By fucking up. Should've gone missionary.
Do you know what would happen if you'd freeze someone to -273.15 degrees Clesius? That person would be 0K

Edit: Just noticed that I flopped the title. :(
The Galaxy is the greatest rapper alive. It rhymes in universes. :)
Why doesnt a chicken wear pants? Because it's pecker is on its face 
Australian word of the day: Dingo Me mate had a barbie last night, but I dingo
So i met someone from American for the first time . I asked "how are you feeling" "depressed"
Teacher vs student Teacher: "Kids, what does the chicken give you?"
Student: "Meat!"
Teacher: "Very good! Now what does the pig give you?"
Student: "Bacon!"
Teacher: "Great! And what does the fat cow give you?"
Student: "Homework!" - 
what do you say to the god of death? what do you say to the god of death?

Arya: Not Today!!

Sean Bean: Oh, you again.
What do you call a singing laptop? A dell 
What do the iPhone 7 and the Titanic have in common? There's no room for jack, on both of them
What happens when Peter Pan tries to throws punches? They Neverland.
mother shouted Where were you last night? mother shouted!
I was in disc/club, son replied.
Oh my god! I hope you didn't see anything which you should not see.
Son: I seen the thing that I should not see there!
What did you seen>
Dad - he softly uttered.
How do you starve a worthless mooch? By hiding his employment check in his work boots.
BIGGEST Joke Samsung has to Offer. Playing media at high volume for long periods of time can damage your hearing.

BIGGEST Joke Microsoft has to offer:

Bill Gates' Microsoft.
What's the difference between seal hunters and teenagers? There's none, both like clubbing.
What did one box spring say to the other? Where's my twin???
ATTACK DOG A man wanted a big, veracious dog to protect his business, so he visited a kennel that specialized in attack dogs. The man explained to the kennel owner that he wanted the biggest, meanest, most vicious dog in the kennel, and the owner offered to take the man on a tour of the premises. After they had been walking for a few minutes, they came upon a large dog. He was snarling loudly and biting and clawing at the cage."He looks like he'd be a pretty good attack dog," said the buyer."Well, he's not bad," replied the owner, "but I have something better in mind for you."They continued walking around the premises, and after a while they found an even larger, meaner dog than the first. He snarled at the two men and tried to bite them through the wire on his cage."Ah," said the buyer, "This must be the dog you were referring to earlier.""Well, no." said the owner. "I have something better in mind for you."The men continued their tour. Eventually, they came upon a fairly large dog that was lying quietly on his side, licking his butt. He did not seem to notice as the men approached."This is the dog I had in mind for you," said the owner. The buyer was flabbergasted. "You're joking!" he exclaimed."This dog seems quite tame; he doesn't act at all like an attack dog at all. Hell, he's just lying there, licking his butt!""I know, I know," said the owner. "But you see, he just ate a lawyer, and he's trying to get the taste out of his mouth."
A man is driving down the road and his car breaks down near a monastery... He goes to the monastery, knocks on the door, and says, "My car broke down. Do you think I could stay the night?" The monks graciously accept him, feed him dinner, even fix his car. As the man tries to fall asleep, he hears a strange sound. A sound unlike anything he's ever heard before. The Sirens that nearly seduced Odysseus into crashing his ship comes to his mind. He doesn't sleep that night. He tosses and turns trying to figure out what could possibly be making such a seductive sound. The next morning, he asks the monks what the sound was, but they say, "We can't tell you. You're not a monk." Distraught, the man is forced to leave. Years later, after never being able to forget that sound, the man goes back to the monastery and pleads for the answer again. The monks reply, "We can't tell you. You're not a monk." The man says, "If the only way I can find out what is making that beautiful sound is to become a monk, then please, make me a monk." The monks reply, "You must travel the earth and tell us how many blades of grass there are and the exact number of grains of sand. When you find these answers, you will have become a monk." The man sets about his task. After years of searching he returns as a gray- haired old man and knocks on the door of the monastery. A monk answers. He is taken before a gathering of all the monks. "In my quest to find what makes that beautiful sound, I traveled the earth and have found what you asked for: By design, the world is in a state of perpetual change. Only God knows what you ask. All a man can know is himself, and only then if he is honest and reflective and willing to strip away self deception." The monks reply, "Congratulations. You have become a monk. We shall now show you the way to the mystery of the sacred sound." The monks lead the man to a wooden door, where the head monk says, "The sound is beyond that door." The monks give him the key, and he opens the door. Behind the wooden door is another door made of stone. The man is given the key to the stone door and he opens it, only to find a door made of ruby. And so it went that he needed keys to doors of emerald, pearl and diamond. Finally, they come to a door made of solid gold. The sound has become very clear and definite. The monks say, "This is the last key to the last door." The man is apprehensive to no end. His life's wish is behind that door! With trembling hands, he unlocks the door, turns the knob, and slowly pushes the door open. Falling to his knees, he is utterly amazed to discover the source of that haunting and seductive sound...

But, of course, I can't tell you what it is because you're not a monk.
Husband on wife's grave Husband on wife's grave.. with a table fan.. crying...
Someone comes and asks - did you love her alot?
Man: Which love? she took a promise that you will re-marry when my graves goes dry - I don't know who stupid put lot of water daily here?
Open Mike Night sounded like a lot of fun... ... Until I realized I'd been invited to an autopsy 
London Tourists. A group was touring London, marveling at the historic buildings, art collections, and such.

During the tour of the Tower of London, a man from Prague and another man from Athens struck up a conversation about some point in history. A small disagreement ensued, which rapidly became a large one. They decided to settle the matter then and there, using the historical accouterments at hand. Donning armour and chain mail, they prepared for a battle to the death.
This attracted the attention of the rest of the tour group, who crowded around for a better look. Inasmuch as the combatants were in period dress, the people couldn’t tell one from another. “Is that the Greek wearing the chain mail?” asked one tourist.
“No,” replied another, “the Greek is in the armour; the Czech is in the mail.”
What do Storm Troopers and Bone Thugs N Harmony have in common? They are both going to miss every body.
There's this dog teaching me some new dance moves. He's a corgi-ographer. 
What do grandmas and elevators have in common? Their doors are very wide.
cheating wife A man returning home a day early from a business trip, got into a taxi at the airport after midnight, and while en-route to his home, asked the driver if he would be a witness, as he suspected his wife was having an affair, and expected to catch her in the act.
The driver agreed, and they both tiptoed into the bedroom, turned on the lights pulled the blanket back and found the wife in bed with another man.
The husband put his gun to the man's head, and the wife shouted, ‘Don't do it, this man has been very generous. Who do you think paid for the Corvette I said I bought for you and who do you think paid for our new boat…he did!’ 
The husband, looked over at the cab driver, and said, ‘What would you do in a case like this?’ 
The cabbie smiled, and said,
I'd cover him up before he catches cold.
Got you good I bet 17482910 dollars you didn't read that number, you just skipped right over it. You didn't even realise I put a letter in it. No, I didn't but you looked back over it. 
Women,When a guy calls you hot,he's looking at your body,When a guy calls you pretty,he's looking at your face, When a guy calls you Beautiful,he's looking at your heart All 3 guys still want to fuck you,though
what do you call a gay dinosaur? Megasaurass
What's the difference between a pregnant woman and a light bulb? You can always unscrew a light bulb.
I have a Doppelganger My Twin 
George Bush met The Queen He turns round and says: ‘As I'm the President, I'm thinking of changing how the country is referred to, and I'm thinking that it should be a Kingdom’ to which the Queen replies, ‘I'm sorry Mr Bush, but to be a Kingdom, you have to have a King in charge - and you're not a King.’ 
George Bush thought a while and then said: ‘How about a Principality then?’, to which the Queen replied ‘Again, to be a Principality you have to be a Prince - and you're not a Prince, Mr Bush.’
Bush thought long and hard and came up with ‘How about an Empire then?’
The Queen, getting a little fed up by now, replied ‘Sorry again, Mr Bush, but to be an Empire you must have an Emperor in charge - and you are not an Emperor.’
Before George Bush could utter another word, The Queen said: ‘I think you're doing quite nicely as a Country.
What do you get when you cross Jesus and a couple of criminals? A good Friday
Who are the most homo-erotic pop group at Hogwarts? Wand Erection.

EDIT: If you don't get it, try saying it aloud.
My girlfriend turned to me and said “Dave, I think we’ve come to the end of the road.” 
“Why?” I said, shocked.  


“We’re in a river.”
Exotic-sounding names for girls that are actually not suitable as names: i.e. "You Named Her WHAT?!" Diseases:
Zika
Chlamydia

Body parts:
Vulva
Areola
Uvula
Tibia
Fibula
Ulna

Workplace acronym:
OSHA

Any more that come to mind? These crack me up because certainly somewhere in the world over the course of human history, children have occasionally been given such inappropriate names.

But OSHA might be funny & harmless 😋




What do you call a retarded kid with no arms and one leg. Names.
Having sex with a SBBW is kind of like... Having sex with a piece of furniture.
Every Man needs a Beautiful wife, intelligent wife, caring wife, loving wife, sexy wife, adjusting & cooperative wife. but it's sad that law allows only one wife.
Why did Donald Trump love the new iPhone 7? Deportation.
My girlfriend and I have rough sex. 
It’s not violent, it's just poorly defined.
What do you call a Blonde in the dirt? Her name was Cindy she had a husband and 2 children 
How I get my dick to be 12 inches? I cut it in half 
Pneumonia was found dead In other news, pneumonia was found dead with 2 bullets in the back of his head, the police are ruling it a suicide.
Saw this unbelievably rough woman with two kids, said to her 'what lovely twins you have' NSFW She said 'what the fuck are you on about, he's 12, she's 4'.

'I'm sorry, just couldnt believe anyone would have fucked you twice'
Doctors have discovered what is causing Hillary Clinton's seizures. They found brain tumors in her ass.
I used to have a part time job helping a one-armed typist write capital letters It was shift work.
What do you call a submissive who likes to bark like a dog? A subwoofer.
Why couldn't the pirate learn the alphabet? Because he was always lost at C!



[ I'm^so^sorry ]


Wanna hear why I love Dorian Gray jokes? cause they never get old
A beautiful woman walks into a bar. The barman asks, “What’ll you have?” She replies, “I’d like a double entendre, please.” 

So he gave her one.
Why didnt the toilet paper cross the road? because it was stuck in a crack
My dog swallowed my engagement ring last night, but luckily coughed it out when he barked. There was a diamond in the ruff. 
Snow! My sister and I quickly ran outside to enjoy this rare treat(we live in England). We made 3 snowmen, then got bored and started to throw snowballs at each other. We ended up lobbing them at each other from opposite ends of where we built the snowmen. Our mum came out to call us in for breakfast, not knowing that she had just entered snowman's land.
I hate 24 letters of the alphabet. It isn't easy.
A man gets raped by an elephant... So he goes to the doctor and the doctor takes a look at his ass and asks what happened. He explained how an elephant had his way with him. Confused the doctor said elephants have a long narrow penis, and your asshole is the size of a 5 gallon bucket. Then the man said, yea but he fingered me first.
People have complained to me that they're sick and tired of hearing my Swedish furniture brand puns. Like Ikea!
I used to love going to dinner parties as a little girl 
My wife hated it though.
Whats the worst thing to hear when you have explosive diarrhea? "Are you ticklish?"
Why are there so many gay monsters? Because they're always coming out of the closet!
What does Tim Cook do when he's home alone at night? Jack off
Just got the iPhone 7. It helped me lose weight! I now have no money to eat for 2 months
The r/all algorithm is so bad... I'm still seeing posts from months ago
An Englishman, a Frenchman, a Spaniard and a German go to see a magic show... They can't see the magician, so the magician stands on a box and asks "can you see me now?"
To which they reply: "yes", "oui", "ci", "ja"
What did letter O say to letter Q ? Harambe!
How many gay men does it take to screw in a lightbulb? I suppose at least two. But where are you going to find a lightbulb that big?
Why shouldn't you try to catch Pokemon in the bathroom? He may pickachu.
How do you eat a kosher meal? You Jew it.
An American, A Canadian and a Boy scout are on a plane. The plane hits turbulence and is about to crash.

the pilot comes out and says "The plane is going down. Everyone for himself!" grabs one of the remaining 3 parachutes and jumps out.

The American says. "We're number 1 so i get to live" hastily grabs 1 of the 2 remaining chutes and jumps out.

The Canadian looks at the boyscout and says "Im sorry things have to end this way... who gets the last parachute?"

The boyscout replies

"oh dont worry, the American grabbed my backpack"
A mathematician, a Statistician and an Accountant are in for a job interview. [x-post from r/accounting] The interviewer calls in the mathematician first, the interview goes well and for the last question the interviewer asks, "What does two plus two equal?"

The mathematician replies, "Four."

The interviewer says great and then calls in the statistician, and after another good interview he asks the same question, "What does two plus two equal?"

The statistician says, "With such a small sample size the answer is four give or take point three percent, but on 9 times out of 10 the answer will be four.”

Satisfied, the interviewer then calls in the accountant and at the end of the interview poses the same question, "What does two plus two equal?"

Very suddenly the accountant gets up, locks the door, closes the shades, disconnects the phone, then approaches the interviewer and asks, "What do you want it to be?"
Fun things to do pt 1 When you're stuck in traffic and some guy revs up his engine just yell out "alright we get it you have a small penis" 
(calling) 'Hey Boss, what's the difference between work and your daughter?' 'I'm not coming into work today'
Where does the working Witch learn her spells? (Original Joke) Invocational School
Life is like a box of chocolate It sucks when you're allergic to chocolate 
Cheap cow... The only cow in a small town in Northern Italy stopped giving milk. Then the town folk found they could buy a cow in Sicily quite cheaply. So, they brought the cow over from Sicily. It was absolutely wonderful. it produced lots of milk every day and everyone was happy.

They bought a bull to mate with the cow to get more cows, so they’d never have to worry about their milk supply again. They put the bull in the pasture with the cow but whenever the bull tried to mount the cow, the cow would move away. No matter what approach the bull tried, the cow would move away from the bull, and he was never able to do the deed. The people were very upset and decided to go to the local veterinarian, Dr. Santucchi, who was very wise, tell him what was happening and ask his advice.

“Whenever the bull tries to mount our cow, she moves away. If he approaches from the back, she moves forward. When he approaches her from the front, she backs off. If he attempts it from the one side, she walks away to the other side.”

The veterinarian rubbed his chin thoughtfully and pondered this before asking, “Did you by chance, buy this cow in Sicily?”

The people were dumbfounded, since no one had ever mentioned that they had brought the cow over from Sicily. “You are truly a wise veterinarian,” they said. “How did you know we got the cow from Sicily?”

The Vet replied with a distant look in his eyes, “My wife is from Sicily.”
ABCDEFGHIJK! Wife: "How would you describe me?" 
Husband: "ABCDEFGHIJK." 
Wife: "What does that mean?" 
Husband: "Adorable, beautiful, cute, delightful, elegant, fashionable, gorgeous, and hot." 
Wife: "Aw, thank you, but what about IJK?" 
Husband: "I'm just kidding!"
Told by my Gross Anatomy professor. (not related and a little long) It was the 1918 world series between the Red Sox and the Cubs.  The Sox had a famous pitcher name Mel Famie. He was renowned all over for his tremendous calm under pressure.

The bottom of the ninth, the Sox are all tied up and the count is empty.  The first batter is up and Mel calls a time out.  He walks to the dugout and quickly drinks 3 beers and heads to the mound.

First pitch, ball one.  Second, ball two. Third pitch, ball three.  Fourth, runner take your base.

Again Mel calls a time.  He heads to the dugout chugs 3 more beers, heads to the mound.

First pitch, ball one.  Second, ball two. Third pitch, ball three.  Fourth, runner take your base.

Two runners on first and second.  Mel again calls time, heads to the dugout, three beers, back to the mound. 

First pitch, ball one.  Second, ball two. Third pitch, ball three.  Fourth, runner take your base.

Bases loaded, Mel heads to the dugout.  He drinks three more beers, back to the mound.  

Next up is the Cubs clean up hitter, Isiah Delafield. 

Mel winds up, the pitch, ball one.  Second pitch, ball 2.  Third pitch, ball 3.  Final Pitch of the series, ball 4.  Delafield takes his base and Mel walks in the winning run. The Cubs win the series.

After the game, the press tries to interview the visibly drunk Mel, but he walks off.  

As the reporters catch up to Isiah, he is asked his opinion on what happened out there and how the Sox fell apart.  

Delafield replied, "I think it was the beer that made Mel Famie walk us."
The iPhone 7 is like the ending of the Titanic... There's no more Jack.
Boob Joke A guy has been admiring his co-worker's massive bust for some time and it becomes more that he can take. He asks if he can suck on her tits for $100. She refuses. He raises the offer to $500 and again she refuses. His final bid is $1000 and she finally agrees. After about 15 minutes of him kissing all over her breasts, motor-boating them and squeezing them she starts to get a little worked up. "Aren't you going to suck on them?" she asks. "Nah, too expensive" he replies.
Why did the yogurt disagree with the cheese? Cultural differences.
Even after 15 years of marriage, I still remember my girlfriends every-time I Login
What's the difference between Jesus and your mom? The sounds they make when they're being nailed
You know what's a real pain in the ass? Hemorrhoids. Just kidding, Tyrone's dick.
What do you call a Black woman who has had more than five abortions? A crime fighter.
How do to an indian burn My curry is better than yours.
There is a fine line between the numerator and the denominator Only a fraction of people will get this.
Being a proofreader isn't difficult. If you know what to except. 
King of the Jungle If the leader of all the lions can't find any prey to catch, does he just swallow his pride?
AMA! Hi, my name is Jack... ...and I recently got fired from Apple.
Why are there so many female archaeologists? Because women love digging up the past.
A dwarf who was a mystic escaped from jail. The call went out that there was a small medium at large.
Why did Bill Clinton sign the NAFTA agreement? [NSFW] He loves a giant sucking sound.
What did the Muslim guy said when his girlfriend asked him to fuck her in a gorilla costume? It's Haram! bae.
The Chinese are up to something I can see it in their eyes.
What kind of terrorists get into Heaven? The Nice ones.
A man lost his arm... A man lost his arm in a terrible accident. After he recovered, he realized that he just couldn't do the things he could do before and he became depressed. He decided to end his life, so he went up to the top of a building to jump. He was standing on the edge and looked down only to see a man with no arms dancing down the sidewalk, spinning around and frolicking happily. Excited, the man with one arm decided that he had to talk to this other man, so he turned and ran back down the stairs and down the sidewalk until he caught up. 

He stopped the man with no arms and explained his story, ending by saying, "...so I was about to jump off that building until I saw you down here. You have no arms, but you're dancing! You've got it so much worse than me but you've found a way to enjoy life, and I just have to know your secret!"

The man with no arms looked shocked, and replied, "Dancing? Hell no, my balls itch!"
If Bill Clinton ever says "I can't. My wife would kill me" What he really means is his wife would have him killed.
Why are scarecrows terrible debaters? No true strawman wins an argument.
A local plastic surgeon started giving away free breast implants... They're up for grabs.
BUSINESS IS BUSINESS A young Jewish boy starts attending public school in a small town. The teacher of the one-room school decides to use her position to try to influence the new student. She asks the class, "Who was the greatest man that ever lived?"A girl raises her hand and says, "I think George Washington was the greatest man that ever lived because he is the Father of our country." The teacher replies, "Well...that's a good answer, but that's not the answer I am looking for."Another young student raises his hand and says, "I think Abraham Lincoln was the greatest man that lived because he freed the slaves and helped end the Civil War." ... "Well, that's another good answer, but that is not the one I was looking for."Then the new Jewish boy raises his hand and says, "I think Jesus Christ was the greatest man that ever lived." The teacher's mouth drops open in astonishment. "Yes!" she says,"that's the answer I was looking for." She then brings him up to the front of the classroom and gives him a lollipop. Later, during recess, another Jewish boy approaches him as he is licking his lollipop. He says, "Why did you say, 'Jesus Christ'?"The boy stops licking his lollipop and replies, "I know it's Moses, and YOU know it's Moses, but business is business."
Mexican guy: Jesus! Jesus: No, no, Zeus is Greek. I'm Jesus.
Why can't women be botanists? Because they'll break the glass ceiling.
Puns are my life My life is just a bad joke.
What's baked everyday and sells itself?  bread
I only enjoy 2 things about a woman 1.Blue Eyes 2.White Dragon
What is Tim Cook's favorite song at Karaoke? "Hit the roooad Jack, and don't you come back no more, no more, no more, no more"
What does a gay horse eat? Haaaaaaay
What's the smartest muscle in the human body? The anal sphincter; it can differentiate solid, liquid, and gas.
Can I trust this guy, or is he just posturing? He keeps telling me he's a chiropractor.
Tropical Fruit I once asked my third grade teacher what a tropical fruit was and he showed me a cocksucker from Guatemala. 

No, wait, I don't think that was my teacher. May have been a guy from the Army.
What is the only correct answer to the question 'Are you ticklish?' I have explosive diarrhea.
Why is the space between a woman's chest and her hips called a waist? Because you could easily fit another pair of tits in there.
A man went in for an interview... A man went in for an interview for a job as a sales man. The interview went quite well, but the trouble was that he kept winking.

The interviewer said, "Although you have a lot of the qualities we are looking for, the fact that you keep winking could put a lot of our potential customers off."

"Oh, that is no problem," said the man. "I stop winking if I take a couple of aspirin."

"Show me," said the interviewer.

So the man reached into his pocket. Embarrassingly he pulled out loads of condoms of every variety - ribbed, flavoured, coloured and everything before he found the packet of aspirin. He took an aspirin and soon stopped winking.

The interviewer said, "I do not think we could employ someone who would be womanizing all over the country."

"Excuse me!" exclaimed the man, "I am a happily married man, not a womanizer!"

"Well, how do you explain all the condoms, then?" asked the interviewer.

The man replied, "Have you ever gone into a drug store, winking, and asked for a packet of aspirin?"
I don't trust the U.S. Government's story about Osama Bin Laden's disposal. It seems a bit fishy.
What does Brooklyn have in common with pantyhose? Flatbush
Seaworld has borrowed a shark to try and make one of their own sharks pregnant...  Personally, I think I would have looked at other options before going to a loan shark...
I like my Japs how I like my bananas... Yellow and in the trees.
What's the difference between a feminist and a gun? A gun only has one trigger.
A Programmer's Story As an undergraduate, I was a Double E major. I studied physics, quantum mechanics, and Maxwell’s equations! I designed circuits! Hah! But does anyone call me Pierre the Electrical Engineer? NO!

As a master’s student, I studied mathematics. I learned and proved many beautiful theorems! I broke new ground with my professors! Hah! But does anyone call me Pierre the mathematician? NO!

BUT WRITE ONE LITTLE PROGRAM!

What did the tv say to the other tv? I DONT FUCKING KNOW THEY ARE TVS!
Last night I was at the bar and this guy kept yelling "bastard" at his pint of beer. It's never nice to witness substance abuse. 
Why do Americans order their dates Month/Day/Year? Because 11/9 just doesn't have the same ring to it.
An ugly woman walked into a store with her 2 kids, yelling at them. An  ugly woman walked into a store with her 2 kids, yelling at them. 

The store clerk pleasantly said, "Good morning ma'am and welcome. Nice children, are they twins?"

The ugly woman stopped yelling and said, "Hell no they are not, one is 9 and the other is 7. Why the hell would u think they're twins, one is tall, other is short, they don't look anything like each other! Are u blind, or just bloody stupid?" 

The clerk replied,"I'm neither blind nor stupid ma'am, I just can't believe someone would fuck u twice." !!
Our local council said they are going to get all the coins out of the wishing well and put them into a balloon. Talk about getting everyone's hopes up.
The Letter Dear Son,

I'm writing this slow 'cause I know you can't read fast.

We don't live where we did when you first left. Your 
Dad read in the paper that most accidents happen 
within 20 miles of home, so we moved.

I won't be able to send you the address as the last 
family here took the numbers with them for their 
next house, so they wouldn't have to change their 
address.

This place has a washing machine. The first day I put 
four shirts in, pulled the chain, and I haven't seen 'em 
since.

It only rained twice this week, three days the first 
time and four days this time.

The coat you wanted me to send you, your Aunt Sue 
said it would be a little too heavy to send in the mail 
with the heavy buttons, so we cut them off and put 
them in the pockets.

About your sister, she had a baby this morning. I 
haven't found out whether it's a girl or a boy, so I 
don't know if you are an Aunt or and Uncle.

Not much more news this time, write soon.

Love,

Mom

P.S. Was going to send you money, but the envelope was already sealed.

Groaner I came up with, my apologies. Why did the dog go to the funeral? Because he was a paw bearer.
I told my psychiatrist that I believe I have the power to detect Indian bread for miles around. He said that's naan-sense.
I tried to remember where I placed my invisible button.. ..but I couldn't put a finger on it
Jesus walks into a bar.. "Just 13 waters please."

*Winks at his disciples*
You're fat. Don't sugarcoat it because you'll eat that too.
So my friend recently started a career as a stand-up comedian... No offense to him, but his jokes are so **lame** that it's a marvel that he can **stand-up**.
First day of school On the first day of college, the dean addressed the students, pointing out some of the rules: "The female dormitory will be out-of-bounds for all male students, and the male dormitory will be off limits to the female students. Anybody caught breaking this rule will be fined $20 the first time. Anybody caught breaking this rule the second time will be fined $60. Being caught a third time will cost you $180. Are there any questions?"
One student raised his hand and asked, "How much for a season pass?"
What's the difference between a chick pea and a lentil? I've never had a lentil on my chest.
What did Abe Lincoln say after a night of drinking? "I set WHO free?"
How is eating pussy and being in the Mafia similar? One slip of tongue and you're in deep shit!!
I've got an L-shaped sofa. Lowercase.
Trying a new thing with my wife.... I've been trying this new thing with my wife. Whenever we have sex I secretly put a dollar in an envelope. However much is in the envelope at the end of the year will be spent on her Christmas present.



So far she's getting a McChicken 




Christmas always sucked when I was a kid... I believed in Santa Claus, and unfortunately, so did my parents.
A Sergeant calls his men out to line up on parade. He calls out: "Private Smith, take one step forward!" After Smith does so, the Sergeant baldly announces: "We've just had word.....your mother is dead!" Whereupon Private Smith collapses on the ground and starts crying uncontrollably.

When the Commanding Officer hears about this, he calls in the Sergeant to bawl him out. "You can't just tell someone their mother is dead like that! Use a bit of tact and subtlety when dealing with something like this, for God's sake!"

A few weeks later the Sergeant calls his men out again. Remembering his Officer's words, he announces: "All those Privates whose mothers are still alive please take one step backwards....not so fast, Private Jones!"
My friend genetically modifies salad. He's a rocket scientist 
A guy sits at a bar in a skyscraper restaurant high above the city. He slams a shot of tequila, goes over to the window and jumps out. The guy sitting next to him can’t believe what he just saw. He’s more surprised when, 10 minutes later, the same guy walks back into the bar and sits down next to him.


The astonished onlooker asks, “How did you do that? I just saw you jump out the window, and we’re hundreds of feet above the ground!”



The jumper responds by slurring, “Well, I don’t get it either. I slam a shot of tequila, and when I jump out the window, the tequila makes me slow down right before I hit the ground. Watch.” He takes a shot, goes to the window and jumps out.



The other guy runs to the window and watches as the guy falls to just above the sidewalk, slows down and lands softly on his feet. A few minutes later, the jumper walks back into the bar.



The other guy has to try it, too, so he orders a shot of tequila. He slams it and jumps out the window. As he reaches the bottom, he doesn’t slow down at all. SPLAT!


The first guy orders another shot of tequila. The bartender shakes his head. “You really are an asshole when you’re drunk, Superman.”
Did you hear they're making designer milkshakes now? They're not suitable for the Lacoste intolerant.
What time did Sean Connery arrive at Wimbledon? Tennish
I'll never forget the last thing my grandfather said to me before he died... "Are you still holding the ladder?"
A man is at a job interview. "What would you say is your greatest weakness?", asks the interviewer. 

Without hesitating the man says, "Honesty." 

The interviewer smiles. "I don't think that can be called a weakness." 

The man shrugs. 

"I don't give a fuck what you think."




Why do Chinese warriors die so easily in battle? No matter how much protective garments they wear, there's still a chink in the armor. 
I'm friends with 25 letters of the alphabet I don't know Y. 
Why does a chicken coop have 2 doors? Because if it had 4 doors it would be a chicken Sedan!
I don't know how to tell you this, but... I'm autistic.
My neighbors are listening to great music... ...Whether they like it or not!
A young British lad finishes his shift down in the pits... Walking into town, pickaxe over his shoulder, he finds himself craving a beer. Much to his dismay, however, every pub seems to be closed. Moving onward, he noticed that the local Conservative club's door is open. Somewhat reluctantly he walks inside and asks the man at the bar within for a pint.

"Sorry," the bartender replied, "we don't serve miners."
The king asks a commoner... 
"Give me your daughter's hand in marriage, and I'll give you her weight in jewels."

"I will need a couple days first." - Replies the commoner 

"To think it over?" asks his majesty.

"No - to fatten her up."

a redditor walks into a bar.. He walks up to the bar and orders a beer, to his left is a drunk in a cheep suit and a tweed hat absolutely pissed as a parrot and hunched over on the bar, to his right is man-mountain of a chap in black riding leathers embellished with Harley Davidson emblems and standing close to 3 foot wide and 7 foot tall. Our hero received his beer, picked it up and said "Tickle your arse with a feather!" And took a sip of his beer. The giant biker turned to him and snarled "WHAT DID YOU SAY?" To which he replied "Particularly nasty weather!" As he gestured with his glass in a friendly manner. The biker immediately cooled his jets and grumbled "Hmmf yeah" and turned back to the bar as our hero wandered off to sit in a booth. Now the drunk guy had witnessed the whole thing and thought it was absolutely brilliant, he decides to give it a go and moves over a space to be next to the biker. He then, a little louder than necessary, says "Shove a feather up your arse!" The biker turns around, grabs him by the collar and says "WHAT WAS THAT?" The drunk lifts his hat and with a smile says "Cunt of a day isn't it?"
Everyone knows the real reason why Trump has so many wives. ...they can't resist the trumptation.
in a keynote Apple announced... ...that they will create a new, better battery that will explode even stronger than the one from Samsung.
I found a girl with 12 tits... Sounds funny, dozen tit?
What do you call a Nazi hurricane? A Tornadolf...

I'll see myself out.
Great news insomniacs! Only 12 sleeps til Christmas.
To avoid being raped when I am in jail... I stick a tube of toothpaste up my ass for complete cavity protection.
What's the difference between a Trumpie and a KKK member? Five days of the week.
Years doen the road, 2016 will be referred to as an accident, or if I may.... A fender-gender.
This is the ideal mail body. You may not like it, but this is what peak perfection looks like: Dear [recipient],

Greetings! This is [sender] and it is with the utmost pleasure and honor with which I report to you. Since I last saw you, I...
Top ten signs you DO NOT want to see at a Hospital. 10. Please pay your medical fees before treatment.
9. Please have a hot water shower within 24 hours of exiting this building.  
8. Do not touch if it glows, including people.  
7. The lift doors do not open on the 2nd floor for your own safety.
6. Our security guards carry real guns.  
5. Slippery when wet.  
4. Leave your mobile phone on and close to your head.  
3. All of our staff have been fully trained and assembled locally.  
2. In case of Fire, don't look at us.  
1. Pharmacy open from 8am - 7pm, for after hour prescriptions, please see guy across the road on corner wearing the black jacket and hat.  
What is a gorillas’ favourite aftershave? Paco Harambe
My son and I don't get along. I call him a son of a bitch. He calls me a motherfucker.
Technically we're both right.
Blonde painter A blonde was recently fired from an M&M factory for throwing away Ws and peeling the shells on the candies. Therefore, she needed a new job to support herself. After going around town asking if anyone needed work done, she found a man who needed a painter. 

"I'm here for the paint job," she said. 

"Alright," said the man. "Here is the paint and your brush. I want you to paint my porch behind the house." 

The blonde immediately went to work painting. Within an hour, she was done and decided to put on a second coating. 

After she finished, she returned to the man for her pay. She said with satisfaction, "I not only completed the job, but I even put on two coats of paint! By the way, that isn't a porsche out back. It's a Ferrari.
My dad always said, "I before E expect after C". Society taught me otherwise. 
Moral of the Story... A man was engaged to a woman with a very beautiful and hot younger sister.

One night before the wedding, the groom drove to his fiancé's house to drop off some stuff for the wedding. When he got there, only the hot younger sister was there and she informed him that her parents and older sister just left to go shopping and would not be back for a few hours. Suddenly, to his surprise, the hot younger sister hugged and kissed him torridly and kept saying stuff like "i've always wanted you" and "this will just be between the two of us". "wait.." the groom said, pushed her away, then franticly ran out of the house towards his car.

To his surprise, the parents of the bride was standing outside by the front door! With teary eyes they shook his hand and told him that he passed the test and that he was truly deserving to marry their daughter.

Moral of the story..?

"Always keep your condoms in your car."
Sick old man An elderly man, woke one morning and was not feeling too well. He got himself up and walked over to his daughters house. He was hard of hearing and asked his daughter if she would escort him to the doctor. By the time he managed to see the doctor, he started to feel really under the weather. His daughter explained to the doctor that her father wasn't himself and was puzzled to what was wrong with him. 

So the doctor checked him over. He checked his blood presure, heart, and lungs. Nothing was wrong. So the doctor asked the old man if he didn't mind giving a blood sample, stool sample, urine sample and semen sample.

The old guy turned to his daughter and said "What did the doctor say?" and the daughter replied "It's ok dad you just have to leave your underpants at the desk on the way out."
Battlefield 1 joke A	B	C	D	
E		G	H	I	J
K	L	M	N	O	P
Q		S	T	U	V
W	X	Y	Z

Notice something? The F and R are out because of DLC
The Mental Asylum A patient asks a psychiatrist how exactly they choose who gets admitted to the asylum.

Psychiatrist: "We carry out a simple test. We fill a bathtub to the brim with water, and give the patient a spoon, a cup, and a bucket. We then ask them to empty the bath."

Patient: "Ah, so if you're sane, you choose the bucket"
You guys wanna hear a messed up joke? ....
Shit I forgot the next line
Two flies are sitting on a pile of dog poop One suggests to the other: “Do you want to hear a really good joke?”

The other fly replies: “But nothing disgusting like last time, I’m trying to eat here!”
I asked my Asian friend if he owned a dog Or is he vegetarian
How does Hillary Clinton say goodbye? "Seizure later!"
Cold. Dead. Fingers. A three word description of a handjob from a zombie. 

We would have also accepted a joke about masturbating being made illegal. 
I was enjoying the most delicious burger at the food court. A vegetarian looked at my burger and said, "You know, a cow died so you could have that burger."

Mid-bite, I looked at his salad and responded, "Maybe he died because you keep eating all its fucking food!"
What is the most ironic thing a Jew can say? I want to be cremated.
A South African actor walks into his managers office (original joke) Looking for a job. His manager thinks about it and says "we only have one role available at the moment, it's a short film about segregation" 
The actor replies "great, that sounds like a-part-heid take"
Water Shouldn't Go in!!!! Girl goes TO repair umbrella. 
Umbrella man says:- Upper cloth has to be removed and rod has to b inserted. 

Girl says:- Do any thing but water shouldn’t go in !!!
Hillary Clinton visited her private doctor She asked: doctor, i don't feel so well

Let me check - he said

After a few minute, he came back with the test result

I'm affraid we have some bad new. You only have 5...

5 what? - Hillary interupted

4...3...
"Hey, it's not a life sentence!!!" A bride tells her husband, "Honey, you know I'm a virgin and I don't know anything about sex. Can you explain it to me first?" "Okay, sweetheart. Putting it simply, we will call your private place 'the prison' and call my private thing 'the prisoner'. So what we do is put the prisoner in the prison." And they made love for the first time and the husband was smiling with satisfaction. Nudging him, his bride giggles, "Honey the prisoner seems to have escaped." Turning on his side, he smiles and says, "Then we will have to re-imprison him." After the second time, the bride says, "Honey, the prisoner is out again!" The husband rises to the occasion and they made love again. The bride again says, "Honey, the prisoner escaped again," to which the husband yelled, "Hey, it's not a life sentence!!!" 
Why was 6 afraid of 7? It was known for blowing up for no reason
Last time I had sex, it felt like the 100m Olympic final. There were 8 black men and a gun.
Why didn't the triangle go outside to get a tan? Cos the sine said so!
I didn't get a B- in my programming class... ...I got a C++.
What is Hitler's favourite hobby?? Guess
Department of Redundancy Department
Three castaways on a island... It's the story of three castaways who found themselves on an island... Shortly after they got captured by indigenous people and were taken to see the tribe's chieftain.


Chieftain (quite surprisingly knew how to speak English): "Now ye gotta do whatever we tell ye to do or we will cut yer balls off, roast 'em and feed 'em to ye before beheading ye."


The three castaways were left with little choice but to obey to their abductors.


Chieftain (still in English): "Now all three of ye must go in the jungle and bring me 100 of the same fruit."


And so they went into the deep jungle, several hours after one of the castaways popped out of the jungle with a hundred oranges. The chieftain ordered him to put all the hundred oranges in his arsehole, but he should do it so without crying, screaming or letting any sound out of his mouth or he would meet a gruesome end.

The castaway began to put the oranges in his rump, but at the count of ten he could not sustain the heavy deserialization of his buttocks, and so he begged for mercy. The chieftain without hesitation relieved him of his nutsacks, roasted them, feed them to him before proceeding with cutting off his head.


After even more hours, the second castaway came out of the jungle with a hundred gooseberries, and same stuff happened... The chieftain ordered him to put all the hundred gooseberries in his booty, but he should do it so without crying, screaming or letting any sound out of his mouth or he would meet an unorthodox end.

And so the castaway began to fill his intestines with gooseberries... He did pretty well but reaching the 100th gooseberry he could not refrain himself from laughing out loud. 

The chieftain, bemused: "Why did ye messed up so close to the goal? Ye could have been free!"

The castaway said: "Sorry, I knew I was near from achieving the objective, but I just could not stop myself from laughing when I saw the other dude coming out of the jungle with a hundred watermelons!"
Whatever you do, do NOT click on this link!! You WILL regret it!! told you.
Why aren't anal sex jokes funny? Because they tend to be inside jokes.
A detecive once asked me if I was constipated... No Shit Sherlock.
My mum asked me if I had taken my lizard for a walk... ... I told her I was goanna do it later.
A man is buying condoms and the cashier asks if he want them in a bag My wife isn't that ugly
Do cannibals prefer red or white wine with dinner? They're not fussed, as long as it's full bodied.
What is a Jewish pedophiles pickup line? Do you kids want to BUY some candy? 

Hyuk hyuk hyuk. Credit to a very special lady. If the delivery was bad that's all me.
My GF told me she wanted a dog So I banged her best friend.
What's a whale's favourite brand of hair gel? Krill Bream. 
I lost my watch at a party once... An hour later I saw some guy stepping on it while he was harassing some woman at that party. Infuriated, I immediately went over, punched him and broke his nose. No one does that to a woman, not on my watch.
What do you call a fly with no wings? A walk.
What is a sure way to pleasure 9 out of 10 people? Gang rape.
A cop catches a drunk urinating in public A cop walks up to a drunk peeing out in public he then says "you know what your doing is illegal right?" to which the man replies with "so?" Noticing the man is heavily intoxicated the cop asks "Sir do you know who I am?" The drunk replies with an apathetic "No" fed up the cop says "Sir you're obviously very drunk" the drunk then asks the cop "Do you know who I am?" the cop replies with a quick "No" the drunk then looks him dead in the eye and says.. "Well then you're drunk" 
Why did the riot police get to work early? So they could beat the crowd. 
Jesus walks into a bar "Just 12 waters please", while winking at his disciples. 
My wife mentioned that she couldn't remember if she took her anti-anxiety medication. I asked if she was worried about it?
I was wondering why the ball was getting bigger. Then it struck me.
If women are so equal to men... how come they can't oppress an entire gender?
What happens when almonds die? Diamond
"My wife is pregnant" A man spoke frantically into the phone "My wife is pregnant and her contractions are only two minutes apart!"

"Is this her first child?" the doctor asked.

"No, you idiot!" the man shouted.

"This is her husband!" 
Spanish delicacy A big Texan stopped at a local restaurant following a day roaming around in Spain.

While sipping his wine, he noticed a sizzling, scrumptious looking platter being served at the next table. Not only did it look good, the smell was wonderful.

He asked the waiter, 'What is that you just served? They look like Spanish oysters!'

The waiter replied, 'Senor, you have excellent taste! Those are not oysters... they are called Cojones de Toro, bull's testicles from the bull fight this morning. A rare delicacy!'

The cowboy said, 'What the heck, bring me an order.'

The waiter replied, 'I am so sorry senor. There is only one serving per day because there is only one bull fight each morning. Tomorrow, if you come early and place your order, we will be sure to save you this delicacy.'

The next morning, the cowboy returned, placed his order, and that evening was served the one and only special delicacy of the day.   After a few bites, inspecting his platter, he called to the waiter and said, 'These are delicious, but they are much, much smaller than the ones I saw you serve yesterday.'

The waiter shrugged his shoulders and replied, 'Si, Senor. Sometimes the bull wins and the man loses !' 😂
what do u call a turtle running on a 9V rechargeable battery? Dura-Shell
Brenda and Terry are going out for the evening, but before they do, they always put their cat outside... The taxi arrives, and just as the couple walk out of the house, the cat scoots back in.

Terry returns inside to chase it out. 

Brenda, not wanting it known that the house would be empty, explains to the taxi driver, "My husband is just going upstairs to say goodbye to my mother."

Several minutes later, an exhausted Terry arrives and climbs back into the taxi saying, "Sorry I took so long, the stupid idiot was hiding under the bed and I had to poke her with a coat hanger several times before I could get her to come out!"
What's long, rigid, purple and makes women scream all night long? Cot death
Apparently, someone in London gets stabbed every 50 seconds. Poor guy.
please help laptop problem I painted my laptop black in hope of it running faster, now it doesnt work at all.
Trump and Hillary walk into a bakery. Trump and Hillary walk into a bakery. While the owner isn't looking, Hillary steals three cakes and slips them into her pocket, whispering to Trump, "Look at how smart I am, I stole three cakes and the owner didn't notice a thing."

Trump scoffs. "Watch this. I can do so much better. I can eat three cakes right in the open and not even get in trouble."

He strides up to the owner and says, "Hey guy. Gimme three cakes and I'll show you a magnificent magic trick." Bemused, the owner agrees. Trump takes three cakes, stuffing all of them into his mouth. The owner is confused.

"When will you do the magic trick?"

Trump smirks.

"Look in Hillary's pocket."
Came up with this one while discussing the selling point of an android game I'm developing Jeorge walked into his sex dungeon and looked around for his slave.
On the furthermost corner a pair of wanting eyes stared him. His slave, Mark Sully was chained to the wall. His very minimal attire was tight to the point of causing the ocasional bruises on his skin.
Jeorge Toolern was a very dominant top and walked menancingly to his chained up counterpart.
Sully watched his master walking up to him and immediatly turned around to offer his behind.
The moment Jeorge had gotten to an arm’s lenght of his slave, he slapped his palm hard on his oiled up ass. “Hi there ButtHard!”- said Jeorge to Sully. (He had a tradition of coming up with cheesy nicknames for his slaves).
Jeorge pulled his slave to his crotch and tightened his grip.
“Easy, Toolern!” -ButtHard to master.
Hear about the guy whose brother cut off his leg below the ankle? Treachery was a foot.
It was my friend's honeymoon.. I asked ," How was last night man ?" 

He said ," Dude... I saw her naked and jacked of thrice !" 
I told my doctor I broke my arm in 2 places today He told me not to go back to those places 
It was a terrible summer for Humpty Dumpty. But he had a great fall.
we dont serve time travelers here A time traveler walks in to the bar.
How do you bury an ant? 
Six feet under.
How do you address a four time convicted felon, alcoholic, money launder, and suspected sex deviant in Central New Jersey? Forgive me father for I have sinned. It has been a week since my last confession.
My friend was telling me she sleeps with multiple men and her husband knows. Bit of a cuck and bull story if you ask me.
Where did Mary go after the explosion? Everywhere
It must really suck working for a calendar company You can't take any days off
Hey baby, can I take your derivative.... So I can lay tangent to those curves.
genders are like... genders are like the twin towers...

there use to be 2 of them and now its just offensive to talk about it
A man visited a zoo A man visited a zoo that only had one animal: a dog. It was a Shih Tzu.
In the 18th century it was common practice to ignore negative numbers People stopped at nothing to avoid them
What do you call a camel with no humps? *Humphrey!*
What's the difference between a girl ant and a boy ant? The girl ant can't swim.
So there's this hot NA chick in my chemistry class Her attitude is always salty, but hey, her booty is sodium fine.

Edit: Na
True story: Kitty cat had PUPPIES! Recently attended my great aunts funeral. This was a beautiful story that accompanied.




My great aunt ran a beauty shop. One day, while tending to a female client in the beauty shop, her female client's highly acclaimed husband sat in a chair as company.

One of my young cousins ran in the beauty shop and shouted to his grandmother (my great aunt) "Kitty cat had puppies!"

The highly acclaimed gentleman that sat with his wife explained to my cousin that "Kitty cats have kittens. Puppy dogs have puppies. So your kitty cat didn't have puppies, she had kittens."

My cousin, calm and undeterred, announced "Well you can say what you want, but my kitty cat had PUPPIES!". He then walked away with confidence abundant, because he was right. 
 
What the "highly acclaimed gentleman" didn't know is that my cousin had named his female DOG "Kitty Cat"

Children are such a joy, and that is one of the best stories I've ever heard. Never heard it until today. 

The moral I take from that is "always be willing to be wrong, even if you are right". 
Did you hear about the woman that died with semen in her ear? She didn't even hear him cumming. 
Chase releases new feature option to have your balance text to you daily I just wish they didn't add "lol" at the end of it. 
The iPhone 7 is an of all trades Sorry, I meant "jack of all trades" but there's no more jack.
What do you get when you cross a hotdog and a potato? A dictator.
I don't have "safe sex" ... ... because I have never been turned on by anything with a combination lock.
(Original) did you know that if you squeeze one of your balls hard enough you'll cum? Because sooner or later you'll bust a nut
What is the rain's favorite medieval reenactment? Storming a castle.
How do you kill a blue elephant? With a blue elephant gun.

How do you kill a pink elephant?

You strangle it until it turns blue, and then shoot it with the blue elephant gun.
how to stop rape Consent
What did the Los Angeles Lakers finish on tuesday? 
Kim Kardashian's chest.
The 5 yr old girl and the construction crew. A young family moved into a house, next to a vacant lot. 

One day, a construction crew turned up to start building a house on the empty lot.

The young family’s 5-year-old daughter naturally took an interest in all the activity going on next door and spent much of each day observing the workers.

Eventually the construction crew, all of them “gems-in-the-rough,” more or less, adopted her as a project mascot. They chatted with her, let her sit with them while they had coffee and lunch breaks, and gave her little jobs to do here and there to make her feel important.

At the end of the first week, they even presented her with a pay envelope containing ten dollars. The little girl took this home to her mother who suggested that she take her ten dollars “pay” she’d received to the bank the next day to start a savings account.

When the girl and her mom got to the bank, the teller was equally impressed and asked the little girl how she had come by her very own pay check at such a young age.

The little girl proudly replied,  “I worked last week with a real work crew building the new house next door to us.”

“Oh my goodness gracious,” said the teller, “and will you be working on the house again this week too?”

The little girl replied, “I will if those assholes at Home Depot ever deliver the f**king sheet rock…”


I can't tell jokes about the Titanic anymore... I just get a sinking feeling when I do.
"Dad, are they allowed to put two people in the same grave?" "I don't think so, son. Why do you ask?"
"Because that headstone over there says, 'Here lies a lawyer and an honest man.'"
What does Bill say to Hillary after sex? I'll be home in 20 minutes.
You shouldn't joke fat people. They have enough on their plate as it is.
What do you call a 16 year old black girl who has had a few abortions? a crime fighter.
A lawyer, a priest and a teacher with his students are on a plane as it begins to fall to the ground... ... the pilot comes over the intercom and says that there are only three parachutes on board. The priest, lawyer and teacher must decide who gets a parachute. Immediately the lawyer grabs a parachute and says "I'm more important than any of you so I get a parachute." The teacher angrily yells "But what about the children?" The lawyer replies "Fuck the children." The priest looks around and says "But is there time?"
What do call a cup when drank from by a married woman? 
A Mississippi cup.
I made a movie about freezing time I showed it to some people, but they thought it was just a picture. 

It's 3 hours and 27 minutes long...if you don't pause
I bought perforated paper once It was a total rip off
Did you hear the joke about the pencil? There's no point.
What did the lighter color shade tell to its dark lover? I want hue.
A friend asked me what's my best American impression... "I don't want to go to the doctor because it's too expensive." 
Have you guys heard of the new store "moderation"? *I heard they have everything there!*
I spent all day replacing the muffler on my car It was exhausting
What are you afraid of One day on a lonely bit of road a police officer sees this old lady speeding in her Cadillac.

So the police officer pulls her over and tells the old lady that she was speeding a bit, then ask her "Are there any weapons in the car ma'am?"

She says "there is a gun rack with rifles and shotguns in the trunk behind the driver a pistol grip shotgun and two revolvers in the center console, a .45 in the glovebox along with a small ankle gun."

The police officer says, "Ma'am, what are you afraid of?"

The old lady grins and says, "Not a mother fucking thing!"

How do you count cows A cowculator
My girlfriend from Ukraine put our whole house on fire Not the house warming party I was looking forward to!
What do Indian Flowers grow? Patels. 
What do you call promoting a broom to the highest rank in the military? A Sweeping Generalization.
What do you call an idiot? You
A hydrogren atom and a neutron are hanging out at a bar. The Hydrogen atom says *"Hey, I think I've been ionised, I can't find my electron!"*   
The Neutron asks *"Really? Are you sure?"*   
Hydrogen replies *"Yes; I'm positive."*  

-----

After consoling Hydrogen for a while, Neutron says *"Bartender, we need a round of drinks. My friend is having a rough day."*  
The bartender delivers the drinks, and Neutron gets out its wallet and asks *"How much for these?"*   
The bartender holds up his hand and shakes his head, *"For you? No charge."*
Greatest Photocopy Machine 9Gag 
What did the Pimp say to the stoned prostitute at the end of the night? High Ho! High Ho! It's home from work I go!
NASA claims that they've just discovered blood sucking bugs on the moon. They're a bunch of lunatics.
I went camping with my dad last weekend It was really in-tents
How are vegans okay with drinking water? They can't eat meat, but they can just destroy a fish's home for a glass of water? 
A guy tells his wife that he’s going fishing... His wife starts to complain because she says he never takes her anywhere, so he tells her, “Fine, you can come fishing with me and the dog tomorrow!”  The next morning, the husband wakes up and wakes his wife.  Now she’s seen that her manipulation has worked a little too well and says, “I don’t want to go fishing.”  The husband is upset.  “You bitched and whined about wanting to go somewhere with me and now you don’t want to go?   Fine, you don’t have to go… but you’re either going to suck my dick or you’re going to let me fuck you in the ass.”  The wife says, “Let me think about it for a minute.”  The husband agrees and he leaves her to get things ready for his trip.  She he comes back, she says, “I don’t want to go fishing and I’m not about to let you fuck me in the ass, so I guess I’ll just suck your dick.”  He whips it out and she starts sucking, but then stops. “Jesus Christ!  Your dick tastes like shit!”  The husband says, “Yeah, the dog didn’t want to go fishing either.”
Why is camping considered an intense sport? Because it's intense
A Snake in the Sand 


 So, there's a man crawling through the desert.

 He'd decided to try his SUV in a little bit of cross-country travel, had great fun zooming over the badlands and through the sand, got lost, hit a big rock, and then he couldn't get it started again. There were no cell phone towers anywhere near, so his cell phone was useless. He had no family, his parents had died a few years before in an auto accident, and his few friends had no idea he was out here.

 He stayed with the car for a day or so, but his one bottle of water ran out
 and he was getting thirsty. He thought maybe he knew the direction back, now that he'd paid attention to the sun and thought he'd figured out which way was north, so he decided to start walking. He figured he only had to go about 30 miles or so and he'd be back to the small town he'd gotten gas in last.

 He thinks about walking at night to avoid the heat and sun, but based upon
 how dark it actually was the night before, and given that he has no flashlight, he's afraid that he'll break a leg or step on a rattlesnake. So,
 he puts on some sun block, puts the rest in his pocket for reapplication
 later, brings an umbrella he'd had in the back of the SUV with him to give
 him a little shade, pours the windshield wiper fluid into his water bottle
 in case he gets that desperate, brings his pocket knife in case he finds a cactus that looks like it might have water in it, and heads out in the
 direction he thinks is right.

 He walks for the entire day. By the end of the day he's really thirsty. He's
 been sweating all day, and his lips are starting to crack. He's reapplied the sunblock twice, and tried to stay under the umbrella, but he still feels sunburned. The windshield wiper fluid sloshing in the bottle in his pocket is really getting tempting now. He knows that it's mainly water and some ethanol and coloring, but he also knows that they add some kind of poison to it to keep people from drinking it. He wonders what the poison is, and
 whether the poison would be worse than dying of thirst.

 He pushes on, trying to get to that small town before dark.

 By the end of the day he starts getting worried. He figures he's been walking at least 3 miles an hour, according to his watch for over 10 hours. That means that if his estimate was right that he should be close to the
 town. But he doesn't recognize any of this. He had to cross a dry creek bed a mile or two back, and he doesn't remember coming through it in the SUV. He figures that maybe he got his direction off just a little and that the dry creek bed was just off to one side of his path. He tells himself that he's close, and that after dark he'll start seeing the town lights over one of these hills, and that'll be all he needs.

 As it gets dim enough that he starts stumbling over small rocks and things,
 he finds a spot and sits down to wait for full dark and the town lights.

 Full dark comes before he knows it. He must have dozed off. He stands back
 up and turns all the way around. He sees nothing but stars.

 He wakes up the next morning feeling absolutely lousy. His eyes are gummy and his mouth and nose feel like they're full of sand. He so thirsty that he can't even swallow. He barely got any sleep because it was so cold. He'd forgotten how cold it got at night in the desert and hadn't noticed it the night before because he'd been in his car.

 He knows the Rule of Threes - three minutes without air, three days without water, three weeks without food - then you die. Some people can make it a little longer, in the best situations. But the desert heat and having to walk and sweat isn't the best situation to be without water. He figures, unless he finds water, this is his last day.

 He rinses his mouth out with a little of the windshield wiper fluid. He waits a while after spitting that little bit out, to see if his mouth goes numb, or he feels dizzy or something. Has his mouth gone numb? Is it just in
 his mind? He's not sure. He'll go a little farther, and if he still doesn't
 find water, he'll try drinking some of the fluid.

 Then he has to face his next, harder question - which way does he go from here? Does he keep walking the same way he was yesterday (assuming that he still knows which way that is), or does he try a new direction? He has no idea what to do.

 Looking at the hills and dunes around him, he thinks he knows the direction he was heading before. Just going by a feeling, he points himself somewhat to the left of that, and starts walking.

 As he walks, the day starts heating up. The desert, too cold just a couple of hours before, soon becomes an oven again. He sweats a little at first, and then stops. He starts getting worried at that - when you stop sweating he knows that means you're in trouble - usually right before heat stroke.

 He decides that it's time to try the windshield wiper fluid. He can't wait
 any longer - if he passes out, he's dead. He stops in the shade of a large
 rock, takes the bottle out, opens it, and takes a mouthful. He slowly
 swallows it, making it last as long as he can. It feels so good in his dry
 and cracked throat that he doesn't even care about the nasty taste. He takes
 another mouthful, and makes it last too. Slowly, he drinks half the bottle.
 He figures that since he's drinking it, he might as well drink enough to
 make some difference and keep himself from passing out.

 He's quit worrying about the denaturing of the wiper fluid. If it kills him,
 it kills him - if he didn't drink it, he'd die anyway. Besides, he's pretty
 sure that whatever substance they denature the fluid with is just designed to make you sick - their way of keeping winos from buying cheap wiper fluid for the ethanol content. He can handle throwing up, if it comes to that.

 He walks. He walks in the hot, dry, windless desert. Sand, rocks, hills,
 dunes, the occasional scrawny cactus or dried bush. No sign of water.
 Sometimes he'll see a little movement to one side or the other, but whatever moved is usually gone before he can focus his eyes on it. Probably birds, lizards, or mice. Maybe snakes, though they usually move more at night. He's careful to stay away from the movements.

 After a while, he begins to stagger. He's not sure if it's fatigue, heat
 stroke finally catching him, or maybe he was wrong and the denaturing of the wiper fluid was worse than he thought. He tries to steady himself, and keep going.

 After more walking, he comes to a large stretch of sand. This is good! He
 knows he passed over a stretch of sand in the SUV - he remembers doing
 donuts in it. Or at least he thinks he remembers it - he's getting woozy
 enough and tired enough that he's not sure what he remembers any more or if
 he's hallucinating. But he thinks he remembers it. So he heads off into it,
 trying to get to the other side, hoping that it gets him closer to the town.

 He was heading for a town, wasn't he? He thinks he was. He isn't sure any more. He's not even sure how long he's been walking any more. Is it still morning? Or has it moved into afternoon and the sun is going down again? It must be afternoon - it seems like it's been too long since he started out.

 He walks through the sand.

 After a while, he comes to a big dune in the sand. This is bad. He doesn't
 remember any dunes when driving over the sand in his SUV. Or at least he
 doesn't think he remembers any. This is bad.

 But, he has no other direction to go. Too late to turn back now. He figures
 that he'll get to the top of the dune and see if he can see anything from
 there that helps him find the town. He keeps going up the dune.

 Halfway up, he slips in the bad footing of the sand for the second or third
 time, and falls to his knees. He doesn't feel like getting back up - he'll
 just fall down again. So, he keeps going up the dune on his hand and knees.

 While crawling, if his throat weren't so dry, he'd laugh. He's finally
 gotten to the hackneyed image of a man lost in the desert - crawling through
 the sand on his hands and knees. If would be the perfect image, he imagines, if only his clothes were more ragged. The people crawling through the desert
 in the cartoons always had ragged clothes. But his have lasted without any
 rips so far. Somebody will probably find his dessicated corpse half buried in the sand years from now, and his clothes will still be in fine shape -
 shake the sand out, and a good wash, and they'd be wearable again. He wishes his throat were wet enough to laugh. He coughs a little instead, and it hurts.

 He finally makes it to the top of the sand dune. Now that he's at the top,
 he struggles a little, but manages to stand up and look around. All he sees
 is sand. Sand, and more sand. Behind him, about a mile away, he thinks he
 sees the rocky ground he left to head into this sand. Ahead of him, more
 dunes, more sand. This isn't where he drove his SUV. This is Hell. Or close enough.

 Again, he doesn't know what to do. He decides to drink the rest of the wiper
 fluid while figuring it out. He takes out the bottle, and is removing the
 cap, when he glances to the side and sees something. Something in the sand. At the bottom of the dune, off to the side, he sees something strange. It's a flat area, in the sand. He stops taking the cap of the bottle off, and tries to look closer. The area seems to be circular. And it's dark - darker than the sand. And, there seems to be something in the middle of it, but he can't tell what it is. He looks as hard as he can, and still can tell from
 here. He's going to have to go down there and look.

 He puts the bottle back in his pocket, and starts to stumble down the dune.
 After a few steps, he realizes that he's in trouble - he's not going to be able to keep his balance. After a couple of more sliding, tottering steps, he falls and starts to roll down the dune. The sand it so hot when his body hits it that for a minute he thinks he's caught fire on the way down - like a movie car wreck flashing into flames as it goes over the cliff, before it ever even hits the ground. He closes his eyes and mouth, covers his face with his hands, and waits to stop rolling.

 He stops, at the bottom of the dune. After a minute or two, he finds enough
 energy to try to sit up and get the sand out of his face and clothes. When
 he clears his eyes enough, he looks around to make sure that the dark spot
 in the sand it still there and he hadn't just imagined it.

 So, seeing the large, flat, dark spot on the sand is still there, he begins
 to crawl towards it. He'd get up and walk towards it, but he doesn't seem to
 have the energy to get up and walk right now. He must be in the final stages
 of dehydration he figures, as he crawls. If this place in the sand doesn't
 have water, he'll likely never make it anywhere else. This is his last
 chance.

 He gets closer and closer, but still can't see what's in the middle of the
 dark area. His eyes won't quite focus any more for some reason. And lifting
 his head up to look takes so much effort that he gives up trying. He just
 keeps crawling.

 Finally, he reaches the area he'd seen from the dune. It takes him a minute of crawling on it before he realizes that he's no longer on sand - he's now crawling on some kind of dark stone. Stone with some kind of marking on it - a pattern cut into the stone. He's too tired to stand up and try to see what the pattern is - so he just keeps crawling. He crawls towards the center,
 where his blurry eyes still see something in the middle of the dark stone
 area.

 His mind, detached in a strange way, notes that either his hands and knees are so burnt by the sand that they no longer feel pain, or that this dark
 stone, in the middle of a burning desert with a pounding, punishing sun
 overhead, doesn't seem to be hot. It almost feels cool. He considers lying
 down on the nice cool surface.

 Cool, dark stone. Not a good sign. He must be hallucinating this. He's
 probably in the middle of a patch of sand, already lying face down and
 dying, and just imagining this whole thing. A desert mirage. Soon the
 beautiful women carrying pitchers of water will come up and start giving him
 a drink. Then he'll know he's gone.

 He decides against laying down on the cool stone. If he's going to die here
 in the middle of this hallucination, he at least wants to see what's in the
 center before he goes. He keeps crawling.

 It's the third time that he hears the voice before he realizes what he's
 hearing. He would swear that someone just said, "Greetings, traveler. You do
 not look well. Do you hear me?"

 He stops crawling. He tries to look up from where he is on his hands and
 knees, but it's too much effort to lift his head. So he tries something
 different - he leans back and tries to sit up on the stone. After a few
 seconds, he catches his balance, avoids falling on his face, sits up, and
 tries to focus his eyes. Blurry. He rubs his eyes with the back of his hands
 and tries again. Better this time.

 Yep. He can see. He's sitting in the middle of a large, flat, dark expanse
 of stone. Directly next to him, about three feet away, is a white post or
 pole about two inches in diameter and sticking up about four or five feet
 out of the stone, at an angle.

 And wrapped around this white rod, tail with rattle on it hovering and
 seeming to be ready to start rattling, is what must be a fifteen foot long
 desert diamondback rattlesnake, looking directly at him.

 He stares at the snake in shock. He doesn't have the energy to get up and
 run away. He doesn't even have the energy to crawl away. This is it, his
 final resting place. No matter what happens, he's not going to be able to
 move from this spot.

 Well, at least dying of a bite from this monster should be quicker than
 dying of thirst. He'll face his end like a man. He struggles to sit up a
 little straighter. The snake keeps watching him. He lifts one hand and waves
 it in the snake's direction, feebly. The snake watches the hand for a
 moment, then goes back to watching the man, looking into his eyes.

 Hmmm. Maybe the snake had no interest in biting him? It hadn't rattled yet -
that was a good sign. Maybe he wasn't going to die of snake bite after all.

 He then remembers that he'd looked up when he'd reached the center here
 because he thought he'd heard a voice. He was still very woozy - he was
 likely to pass out soon, the sun still beat down on him even though he was
 now on cool stone. He still didn't have anything to drink. But maybe he had
 actually heard a voice. This stone didn't look natural. Nor did that white
 post sticking up out of the stone. Someone had to have built this. Maybe
 they were still nearby. Maybe that was who talked to him. Maybe this snake
 was even their pet, and that's why it wasn't biting.

 He tries to clear his throat to say, "Hello," but his throat is too dry. All
 that comes out is a coughing or wheezing sound. There is no way he's going
 to be able to talk without something to drink. He feels his pocket, and the
 bottle with the wiper fluid is still there. He shakily pulls the bottle out,
 almost losing his balance and falling on his back in the process. This isn't
 good. He doesn't have much time left, by his reckoning, before he passes
 out.

 He gets the lid off of the bottle, manages to get the bottle to his lips,
 and pours some of the fluid into his mouth. He sloshes it around, and then
 swallows it. He coughs a little. His throat feels better. Maybe he can talk
 now.

 He tries again. Ignoring the snake, he turns to look around him, hoping to
 spot the owner of this place, and croaks out, "Hello? Is there anyone here?"

 He hears, from his side, "Greetings. What is it that you want?"

 He turns his head, back towards the snake. That's where the sound had seemed
 to come from. The only thing he can think of is that there must be a
 speaker, hidden under the snake, or maybe built into that post. He decides
 to try asking for help.

 "Please," he croaks again, suddenly feeling dizzy, "I'd love to not be
 thirsty any more. I've been a long time without water. Can you help me?"

 Looking in the direction of the snake, hoping to see where the voice was
 coming from this time, he is shocked to see the snake rear back, open its
 mouth, and speak. He hears it say, as the dizziness overtakes him and he
 falls forward, face first on the stone, "Very well. Coming up."

 A piercing pain shoots through his shoulder. Suddenly he is awake. He sits
 up and grabs his shoulder, wincing at the throbbing pain. He's momentarily
 disoriented as he looks around, and then he remembers - the crawl across the
 sand, the dark area of stone, the snake. He sees the snake, still wrapped
 around the tilted white post, still looking at him.

 He reaches up and feels his shoulder, where it hurts. It feels slightly wet.
 He pulls his fingers away and looks at them - blood. He feels his shoulder
 again - his shirt has what feels like two holes in it - two puncture holes -
 they match up with the two aching spots of pain on his shoulder. He had been
 bitten. By the snake.

 "It'll feel better in a minute." He looks up - it's the snake talking. He
 hadn't dreamed it. Suddenly he notices - he's not dizzy any more. And more
 importantly, he's not thirsty any more - at all!

 "Have I died? Is this the afterlife? Why are you biting me in the
 afterlife?"

 "Sorry about that, but I had to bite you," says the snake. "That's the way I
 work. It all comes through the bite. Think of it as natural medicine."

 "You bit me to help me? Why aren't I thirsty any more? Did you give me a
 drink before you bit me? How did I drink enough while unconscious to not be
 thirsty any more? I haven't had a drink for over two days. Well, except for
 the windshield wiper fluid... hold it, how in the world does a snake talk?
 Are you real? Are you some sort of Disney animation?"

 "No," says the snake, "I'm real. As real as you or anyone is, anyway. I
 didn't give you a drink. I bit you. That's how it works - it's what I do. I
 bite. I don't have hands to give you a drink, even if I had water just
 sitting around here."

 The man sat stunned for a minute. Here he was, sitting in the middle of the
 desert on some strange stone that should be hot but wasn't, talking to a
 snake that could talk back and had just bitten him. And he felt better. Not
 great - he was still starving and exhausted, but much better - he was no
 longer thirsty. He had started to sweat again, but only slightly. He felt
 hot, in this sun, but it was starting to get lower in the sky, and the cool
 stone beneath him was a relief he could notice now that he was no longer
 dying of thirst.

 "I might suggest that we take care of that methanol you now have in your
 system with the next request," continued the snake. "I can guess why you
 drank it, but I'm not sure how much you drank, or how much methanol was left
 in the wiper fluid. That stuff is nasty. It'll make you go blind in a day or
 two, if you drank enough of it."

 "Ummm, n-next request?" said the man. He put his hand back on his hurting
 shoulder and backed away from the snake a little.

 "That's the way it works. If you like, that is," explained the snake. "You
 get three requests. Call them wishes, if you wish." The snake grinned at his
 own joke, and the man drew back a little further from the show of fangs.

 "But there are rules," the snake continued. "The first request is free. The
 second requires an agreement of secrecy. The third requires the binding of
 responsibility." The snake looks at the man seriously.

 "By the way," the snake says suddenly, "my name is Nathan. Old Nathan,
 Samuel used to call me. He gave me the name. Before that, most of the Bound
 used to just call me 'Snake'. But that got old, and Samuel wouldn't stand
 for it. He said that anything that could talk needed a name. He was big into
 names. You can call me Nate, if you wish." Again, the snake grinned. "Sorry
 if I don't offer to shake, but I think you can understand - my shake sounds
 somewhat threatening." The snake give his rattle a little shake.

 "Umm, my name is Jack," said the man, trying to absorb all of this. "Jack
 Samson.

 "Can I ask you a question?" Jack says suddenly. "What happened to the
 poison...umm, in your bite. Why aren't I dying now? How did you do that?
 What do you mean by that's how you work?"

 "That's more than one question," grins Nate. "But I'll still try to answer
 all of them. First, yes, you can ask me a question." The snake's grin gets
 wider. "Second, the poison is in you. It changed you. You now no longer need
 to drink. That's what you asked for. Or, well, technically, you asked to not
 be thirsty any more - but 'any more' is such a vague term. I decided to make
 it permanent - now, as long as you live, you shouldn't need to drink much at
 all. Your body will conserve water very efficiently. You should be able to
 get enough just from the food you eat - much like a creature of the desert.
 You've been changed.

 "For the third question," Nate continues, "you are still dying. Besides the
 effects of that methanol in your system, you're a man - and men are mortal.
 In your current state, I give you no more than about another 50 years.
 Assuming you get out of this desert, alive, that is." Nate seemed vastly
 amused at his own humor, and continued his wide grin.

 "As for the fourth question," Nate said, looking more serious as far as Jack
 could tell, as Jack was just now working on his ability to read
 talking-snake emotions from snake facial features, "first you have to agree
 to make a second request and become bound by the secrecy, or I can't tell
 you."

 "Wait," joked Jack, "isn't this where you say you could tell me, but you'd
 have to kill me?"

 "I thought that was implied." Nate continued to look serious.

 "Ummm...yeah." Jack leaned back a little as he remembered again that he was
 talking to a fifteen foot poisonous reptile with a reputation for having a
 nasty temper. "So, what is this 'Bound by Secrecy' stuff, and can you really
 stop the effects of the methanol?" Jack thought for a second. "And, what do
 you mean methanol, anyway? I thought these days they use ethanol in wiper
 fluid, and just denature it?"

 "They may, I don't really know," said Nate. "I haven't gotten out in a
 while. Maybe they do. All I know is that I smell methanol on your breath and
 on that bottle in your pocket. And the blue color of the liquid when you
 pulled it out to drink some let me guess that it was wiper fluid. I assume
 that they still color wiper fluid blue?"

 "Yeah, they do," said Jack.

 "I figured," replied Nate. "As for being bound by secrecy - with the
 fulfillment of your next request, you will be bound to say nothing about me,
 this place, or any of the information I will tell you after that, when you
 decide to go back out to your kind. You won't be allowed to talk about me,
 write about me, use sign language, charades, or even act in a way that will
 lead someone to guess correctly about me. You'll be bound to secrecy. Of
 course, I'll also ask you to promise not to give me away, and as I'm
 guessing that you're a man of your word, you'll never test the binding
 anyway, so you won't notice." Nate said the last part with utter confidence.

 Jack, who had always prided himself on being a man of his word, felt a
 little nervous at this. "Ummm, hey, Nate, who are you? How did you know
 that? Are you, umm, omniscient, or something?"

 Well, Jack," said Nate sadly, "I can't tell you that, unless you make the
 second request." Nate looked away for a minute, then looked back.

 "Umm, well, ok," said Jack, "what is this about a second request? What can I
 ask for? Are you allowed to tell me that?"

 "Sure!" said Nate, brightening. "You're allowed to ask for changes. Changes
 to yourself. They're like wishes, but they can only affect you. Oh, and
 before you ask, I can't give you immortality. Or omniscience. Or
 omnipresence, for that matter. Though I might be able to make you gaseous
 and yet remain alive, and then you could spread through the atmosphere and
 sort of be omnipresent. But what good would that be - you still wouldn't be
 omniscient and thus still could only focus on one thing at a time. Not very
 useful, at least in my opinion." Nate stopped when he realized that Jack was
 staring at him.

 "Well, anyway," continued Nate, "I'd probably suggest giving you permanent
 good health. It would negate the methanol now in your system, you'd be
 immune to most poisons and diseases, and you'd tend to live a very long
 time, barring accident, of course. And you'll even have a tendency to
 recover from accidents well. It always seemed like a good choice for a
 request to me."

 "Cure the methanol poisoning, huh?" said Jack. "And keep me healthy for a
 long time? Hmmm. It doesn't sound bad at that. And it has to be a request
 about a change to me? I can't ask to be rich, right? Because that's not
 really a change to me?"

 "Right," nodded Nate.

 "Could I ask to be a genius and permanently healthy?" Jack asked, hopefully.

 "That takes two requests, Jack."

 "Yeah, I figured so," said Jack. "But I could ask to be a genius? I could
 become the smartest scientist in the world? Or the best athlete?"

 "Well, I could make you very smart," admitted Nate, "but that wouldn't
 necessarily make you the best scientist in the world. Or, I could make you
 very athletic, but it wouldn't necessarily make you the best athlete either.
 You've heard the saying that 99% of genius is hard work? Well, there's some
 truth to that. I can give you the talent, but I can't make you work hard. It
 all depends on what you decide to do with it."

 "Hmmm," said Jack. "Ok, I think I understand. And I get a third request,
 after this one?"

 "Maybe," said Nate, "it depends on what you decide then. There are more
 rules for the third request that I can only tell you about after the second
 request. You know how it goes." Nate looked like he'd shrug, if he had
 shoulders.

 "Ok, well, since I'd rather not be blind in a day or two, and permanent
 health doesn't sound bad, then consider that my second request. Officially.
 Do I need to sign in blood or something?"

 "No," said Nate. "Just hold out your hand. Or heel." Nate grinned. "Or
 whatever part you want me to bite. I have to bite you again. Like I said,
 that's how it works - the poison, you know," Nate said apologetically.

 Jack winced a little and felt his shoulder, where the last bite was. Hey, it
 didn't hurt any more. Just like Nate had said. That made Jack feel better
 about the biting business. But still, standing still while a fifteen foot
 snake sunk it's fangs into you. Jack stood up. Ignoring how good it felt to
 be able to stand again, and the hunger starting to gnaw at his stomach, Jack
 tried to decide where he wanted to get bitten. Despite knowing that it
 wouldn't hurt for long, Jack knew that this wasn't going to be easy.

 "Hey, Jack," Nate suddenly said, looking past Jack towards the dunes behind
 him, "is that someone else coming up over there?"

 Jack spun around and looked. Who else could be out here in the middle of
 nowhere? And did they bring food?

 Wait a minute, there was nobody over there. What was Nate...

 Jack let out a bellow as he felt two fangs sink into his rear end, through
 his jeans...

 Jack sat down carefully, favoring his more tender buttock. "I would have
 decided, eventually, Nate. I was just thinking about it. You didn't have to
 hoodwink me like that."

 "I've been doing this a long time, Jack," said Nate, confidently. "You
 humans have a hard time sitting still and letting a snake bite you -
 especially one my size. And besides, admit it - it's only been a couple of
 minutes and it already doesn't hurt any more, does it? That's because of the
 health benefit with this one. I told you that you'd heal quickly now."

 "Yeah, well, still," said Jack, "it's the principle of the thing. And nobody
 likes being bitten in the butt! Couldn't you have gotten my calf or
 something instead?"

 "More meat in the typical human butt," replied Nate. "And less chance you
 accidentally kick me or move at the last second."

 "Yeah, right. So, tell me all of these wonderful secrets that I now qualify
 to hear," answered Jack.

 "Ok," said Nate. "Do you want to ask questions first, or do you want me to
 just start talking?"

 "Just talk," said Jack. "I'll sit here and try to not think about food."

 "We could go try to rustle up some food for you first, if you like,"
 answered Nate.

 "Hey! You didn't tell me you had food around here, Nate!" Jack jumped up.
 "What do we have? Am I in walking distance to town? Or can you magically
 whip up food along with your other powers?" Jack was almost shouting with
 excitement. His stomach had been growling for hours.

 "I was thinking more like I could flush something out of its hole and bite
 it for you, and you could skin it and eat it. Assuming you have a knife,
 that is," replied Nate, with the grin that Jack was starting to get used to.

 "Ugh," said Jack, sitting back down. "I think I'll pass. I can last a little
 longer before I get desperate enough to eat desert rat, or whatever else it
 is you find out here. And there's nothing to burn - I'd have to eat it raw.
 No thanks. Just talk."

 "Ok," replied Nate, still grinning. "But I'd better hurry, before you start
 looking at me as food.

 Nate reared back a little, looked around for a second, and then continued.
 "You, Jack, are sitting in the middle of the Garden of Eden."

 Jack looked around at the sand and dunes and then looked back at Nate
 sceptically.

 "Well, that's the best I can figure it, anyway, Jack," said Nate. "Stand up
 and look at the symbol on the rock here." Nate gestured around the dark
 stone they were both sitting on with his nose.

 Jack stood up and looked. Carved into the stone in a bas-relief was a
 representation of a large tree. The angled-pole that Nate was wrapped around
 was coming out of the trunk of the tree, right below where the main branches
 left the truck to reach out across the stone. It was very well done - it
 looked more like a tree had been reduced to almost two dimensions and
 embedded in the stone than it did like a carving.

 Jack walked around and looked at the details in the fading light of the
 setting sun. He wished he'd looked at it while the sun was higher in the
 sky.

Wait! The sun was setting! That meant he was going to have to spend another
 night out here! Arrrgh!

 Jack looked out across the desert for a little bit, and then came back and
 stood next to Nate. "In all the excitement, I almost forgot, Nate," said
 Jack. "Which way is it back to town? And how far? I'm eventually going to
 have to head back - I'm not sure I'll be able to survive by eating raw
 desert critters for long. And even if I can, I'm not sure I'll want to."

 "It's about 30 miles that way." Nate pointed, with the rattle on his tail
 this time. As far as Jack could tell, it was a direction at right angles to
 the way he'd been going when he was crawling here. "But that's 30 miles by
 the way the crow flies. It's about 40 by the way a man walks. You should be
 able to do it in about half a day with your improved endurance, if you head
 out early tomorrow, Jack."

 Jack looked out the way the snake had pointed for a few seconds more, and
 then sat back down. It was getting dark. Not much he could do about heading
 out right now. And besides, Nate was just about to get to the interesting
 stuff. "Garden of Eden? As best as you can figure it?"

 "Well, yeah, as best as I and Samuel could figure it anyway," said Nate. "He
 figured that the story just got a little mixed up. You know, snake, in a
 'tree', offering 'temptations', making bargains. That kind stuff. But he
 could never quite figure out how the Hebrews found out about this spot from
 across the ocean. He worried about that for a while."

 "Garden of Eden, hunh?" said Jack. "How long have you been here, Nate?"

 "No idea, really," replied Nate. "A long time. It never occurred to me to
 count years, until recently, and by then, of course, it was too late. But I
 do remember when this whole place was green, so I figure it's been thousands
 of years, at least."

 "So, are you the snake that tempted Eve?" said Jack.

 "Beats me," said Nate. "Maybe. I can't remember if the first one of your
 kind that I talked to was female or not, and I never got a name, but it
 could have been. And I suppose she could have considered my offer to grant
 requests a 'temptation', though I've rarely had refusals."

 "Well, umm, how did you get here then? And why is that white pole stuck out
 of the stone there?" asked Jack.

 "Dad left me here. Or, I assume it was my dad. It was another snake - much
 bigger than I was back then. I remember talking to him, but I don't remember
 if it was in a language, or just kind of understanding what he wanted. But
 one day, he brought me to this stone, told me about it, and asked me to do
 something for him. I talked it over with him for a while, then agreed. I've
 been here ever since.

 "What is this place?" said Jack. "And what did he ask you to do?"

 "Well, you see this pole here, sticking out of the stone?" Nate loosened his
 coils around the tilted white pole and showed Jack where it descended into
 the stone. The pole was tilted at about a 45 degree angle and seemed to
 enter the stone in an eighteen inch slot cut into the stone. Jack leaned
 over and looked. The slot was dark and the pole went down into it as far as
 Jack could see in the dim light. Jack reached out to touch the pole, but
 Nate was suddenly there in the way.

 "You can't touch that yet, Jack," said Nate.

 "Why not?" asked Jack.

 "I haven't explained it to you yet," replied Nate.

 "Well, it kinda looks like a lever or something," said Jack. "You'd push it
 that way, and it would move in the slot."

 "Yep, that's what it is," replied Nate.

 "What does it do?" asked Jack. "End the world?"

 "Oh, no," said Nate. "Nothing that drastic. It just ends humanity. I call it
 'The Lever of Doom'." For the last few words Nate had used a deeper, ringing
 voice. He tried to look serious for a few seconds, and then gave up and
 grinned.

 Jack was initially startled by Nate's pronouncement, but when Nate grinned
 Jack laughed. "Ha! You almost had me fooled for a second there. What does it
 really do?"

 "Oh, it really ends humanity, like I said," smirked Nate. "I just thought
 the voice I used was funny, didn't you?"

 Nate continued to grin.

 "A lever to end humanity?" asked Jack. "What in the world is that for? Why
 would anyone need to end humanity?"

 "Well," replied Nate, "I get the idea that maybe humanity was an experiment.
 Or maybe the Big Guy just thought, that if humanity started going really
 bad, there should be a way to end it. I'm not really sure. All I know are
 the rules, and the guesses that Samuel and I had about why it's here. I
 didn't think to ask back when I started here."

 "Rules? What rules?" asked Jack.

 "The rules are that I can't tell anybody about it or let them touch it
 unless they agree to be bound to secrecy by a bite. And that only one human
 can be bound in that way at a time. That's it." explained Nate.

 Jack looked somewhat shocked. "You mean that I could pull the lever now?
 You'd let me end humanity?"

 "Yep," replied Nate, "if you want to." Nate looked at Jack carefully. "Do
 you want to, Jack?"

 "Umm, no." said Jack, stepping a little further back from the lever. "Why in
 the world would anyone want to end humanity? It'd take a psychotic to want
 that! Or worse, a suicidal psychotic, because it would kill him too,
 wouldn't it?"

 "Yep," replied Nate, "being as he'd be human too."

 "Has anyone ever seriously considered it?" asked Nate. "Any of those bound
 to secrecy, that is?"

 "Well, of course, I think they've all seriously considered it at one time or
 another. Being given that kind of responsibility makes you sit down and
 think, or so I'm told. Samuel considered it several times. He'd often get
 disgusted with humanity, come out here, and just hold the lever for a while.
 But he never pulled it. Or you wouldn't be here." Nate grinned some more.

 Jack sat down, well back from the lever. He looked thoughtful and puzzled at
 the same time. After a bit, he said, "So this makes me the Judge of
 humanity? I get to decide whether they keep going or just end? Me?"

 "That seems to be it," agreed Nate.

 "What kind of criteria do I use to decide?" said Jack. "How do I make this
 decision? Am I supposed to decide if they're good? Or too many of them are
 bad? Or that they're going the wrong way? Is there a set of rules for that?"

 "Nope," replied Nate. "You pretty much just have to decide on your own. It's
 up to you, however you want to decide it. I guess that you're just supposed
 to know."

 "But what if I get mad at someone? Or some girl dumps me and I feel
 horrible? Couldn't I make a mistake? How do I know that I won't screw up?"
 protested Jack.

 Nate gave his kind of snake-like shrug again. "You don't. You just have to
 try your best, Jack."

 Jack sat there for a while, staring off into the desert that was rapidly
 getting dark, chewing on a fingernail.

 Suddenly, Jack turned around and looked at the snake. "Nate, was Samuel the
 one bound to this before me?"

 "Yep," replied Nate. "He was a good guy. Talked to me a lot. Taught me to
 read and brought me books. I think I still have a good pile of them buried
 in the sand around here somewhere. I still miss him. He died a few months
 ago."

**(CONTINUED IN COMMENTS)**
What type of pants do you need to start a car? Cargo pants
How it's made A dentist noticed that his next patient, an elderly lady, was looking very nervous so he decided to tell her a little joke as he put on his gloves.

“Do you know how they make these gloves?” he asked. “No, I don’t” she replied.

Well,” he spoofed, “there’s a building in China with a big tank of latex and workers of all hand sizes walk up to the tank, dip in their hands, let them dry, then peel off the gloves and throw them into boxes of the right size.”

She didn’t crack a smile. “Oh, well. I tried.” – he thought.

Five minutes later, during a delicate portion of the dental procedure, she burst out laughing.

“What’s so funny?” he asked. “I was just picturing how condoms are made!” – she said.
They say Trump isn't appealing to minorities... ...but according to the latest polls, he's winning 100% of the Naive American vote
So a man is in a hostess club, and asks if she would want to go on a date with him... She responds:


"Sorry, I'm only interested in a commited relationship right now."


He says "500 dollars". The hostess repeats what she had just said. He proceeds to say "1000 dollars". She says no again.


The man keeps adding, until he reaches 50,000. The hostess stops him.


"Ok, ok, I'll come with you. Where do you want to go?"


The man responds:


"Who the hell said anything about going anywhere? I was just counting my money."

--------

Sorry for the bad formating, on mobile right now.

All credit goes to my mom, who told me about it (and no, she is not a hostess)
What did the helicopter propeller say to Leonardo DiCaprio? "I'm not a real big fan."
What's a pirates favorite letter? 'Tis not Arrrr for it's the sea he loves.
What colour pants do you need to start a vehicle? Khaki 
Uranium, Potassium, Fluorine, and Carbon all walk into a bar, late one Saturday evening. Fluorine goes up to the bartender and orders a pint of scotch. Without question, the bartender fills up a glass and hands it to Fluorine.

Uranium then goes up to the bartender and orders a pints of gin. Again, without question, the bartender fill up a pint full of Uranium's gin that he ordered.

Carbon follows, this time ordering a pint of rum - his favorite! The bartender conforms, giving Carbon his pint, and carries on.

Potassium, however, orders *two* pints of his personal favorite vodka, claiming he had a rough day. The bartender understands, and he gives Potassium his fifth of vodka that was ordered.

The four elements chug their drinks in mere minutes! The bartender rushed over, thinking something had gone wrong, and... FUCK! I forgot the punchline!
I got my first prostate exam I got my first prostate exam today and I was pretty scared about the whole ordeal. The doctor took me in the room and explained it's not all that bad and it would be over before I knew it. After a few preliminary checkups I got ready and went ahead and laid over the exam table and tried to prepare myself for what was coming. I tensed up at first and the doctor put a hand on my right shoulder and said, "relax,okay big guy! It's all gonna be over soon I just need to check for enlargements." About 10 more seconds go by and I still just can't seem to relax. That's when the doctor put his other hand on my left shoulder and said, "come on now buddy, take it easy!"
A Texan walks into a pub in Ireland He clears his voice to the crowd of drinkers.
He says, “I hear you Irish are a bunch of hard drinkers. I’ll give $500 American dollars to anybody in here who can drink 10 pints of Guinness back-to-back.”
The room is quiet and no one takes up the Texan’s offer. One man even leaves. Thirty minutes later the same gentleman who left shows back up and taps the Texan on the shoulder. “Is your bet still good?”, asks the Irishman.
The Texan says yes and asks the bartender to line up 10 pints of Guinness. Immediately the Irishman tears into all 10 of the pint glasses drinking them all back-to-back. The other pub patrons cheer as the Texan sits in amazement.
The Texan gives the Irishman the $500 and says, “If ya don’t mind me askin’, where did you go for that 30 minutes you were gone?”
The Irishman replies, “Oh…I had to go to the pub down the street to see if I could do it first”.
Why did the fruit have relationship issues? He cant elope
Literature for the blind What did the blind man say when he picked up a cheese grater? 

This is the most violent story I've ever read! 
How many programmers does it take to change a light bulb? I'm gonna need some specs or an outline of the scope, before I can get you an estimate.
Mind-blowing orgasm A lonely man decides he's going to obtain a lady of the night to have company for the evening. He goes out for a drive and after reviewing the "menu" of the street walkers, he's disappointed.

He heads into a bar and orders a beer. As he's eyeing his glass, a woman approaches him.

"Hey good looking, if you take me home I'll give you the most amazing head you ever had."

The woman is gorgeous, so he agrees.

They head back to his place and she tells him the fee which is quite high.

"Just so you know, while I give you head I will sing you an opera song. How I do it is my business. The lights have to be off."

The man agrees and turns off the light. He gets the best head he's ever had to some of the most fantastic opera singing. Once done, he pays her and she leaves.

The next night he is craving it again but he's also very curious how she did it. So he heads to the bar and spots the woman again. He brings her back to his place and pleads with her to tell him how she does it.

"Nope. It's my secret. Are we doing this or should I leave?"

He sighs and turns off the light. The blowjob was even better than before. She went on for a while with her opera and he had the most amazing mind-blowing orgasm. Lights go on, she is paid and leaves.

The following night he wants to know once and for all. He heads to the bar, brings her back to his place and turns off the light. He unzips his pants and she starts singing opera.

After a minute, he runs over to the light switch and turns it on. The prostitute is holding a glass eye.
What’s baked every day and sells itself? 
My sister.
Why did Adele cross the road? To say "Hello" from the other side....
What does Ryan do at an all you can eat buffet? Go back 10 seconds
Did you hear about the man with 5 penises? His condoms fit like a glove.
Statistics say there's a gay guy in every group of friends. 
 I think it's Tim.. he's got a great ass.
The First Lady visits a major hospital to open a new ward. She is shown around first by a nurse so she can inspect the facilities.
On her way, she hears orgasmic groans coming from a nearby room.
She goes to the room to investigate and, upon arriving, finds that a man is masturbating on the bed.
She asks the nurse "Why is that man doing that?"
The nurse replies "Oh, he's got to relieve himself every so often because he has a disorder."
"Oh, OK then," the the First Lady said, and moved on, but on the way she hears more orgasmic groans.
She looks in the room and sees a nurse giving a man a blowjob.
The First Lady asks her escort "Why is that nurse giving that man a blowjob?"
Her nurse escort says "Oh, he's got the same disorder as the man before, only this one's got health insurance!"
What do you call a camel with no humps? *Humphrey!*
What did the soviets say when they saw concentration camps? "I did Nazi that coming*
LF a hooker: not grade A material. Just a working man's girl. You know...

A jack off all trades.
Did you hear about the guy with five penises? His condom fit like a glove. 
Stop making gun violence jokes... They trigger me.
A compass, a cough drop, and a match. As a Boy Scout, we would camp a lot and go on hikes.


One night, we had to do a night hike, alone, for a merit badge. I had left the campsite about an hour earlier and a terrible storm rolled in. The sky opened up and the ground was quickly saturated. I tried to continue my hike for another few minutes, but it got cold and I was chilled and soaked to the bone, so I decided to try to head back to camp.


Lightning was starting to crackle above me, so I thought I should try to take a shortcut to make my hike back quicker. I pulled out my compass and found my direction, but the rain made it impossible to see more than five feet in front of me.


I was looking down at my compass, not paying any attention to where I was going, and suddenly felt weightless. The feeling didn't last long as I thumped down on slippery earth a second later.


I had fallen onto a ledge on the side of a rather steep cliff, the bottom of which was at least fifty feet down.


I sat there, contemplating on how to get back up this cliff as water rolled over the edge ten feet above me. There was nothing to grab onto to pull myself up. I was stuck there.


After a few minutes, I noticed the little ledge I was standing on was slowly getting smaller. The water was coming down so hard it was eroding the tiny bit of safety I had.


I dug through my pockets, thinking maybe I had something, anything, to help me out of my precarious situation. All I had was my compass, a cough drop, and a match. I was screwed.


So, I sat there, watching the edge of the ledge I was on get closer and closer to my feet, when suddenly I felt something pushing on my back.
I turned slightly and saw a wooden box sticking out of the cliff behind me. It was working its way out of the side, the rain surely helping it along. I tried to move away from it, but the ledge wasn't very wide and the box kept coming out, pushing me farther to the weak and failing edge.


As more of the box came out, to my horror, I realized it was a coffin! I had no idea how old it was, but it looked rather rotten. All I could think of was being pushed off this ledge, and the rotten coffin breaking and dropping a skeleton onto my broken and battered body at the bottom.


The coffin crept closer, my foot began to slip. I grabbed onto a root that was sticking out of the cliff side and dug in my pocket once more.


I hurriedly tore the wrapper off the cough drop and stuck it in my mouth.

It stopped the coffin. 
If a mentally challenged midget is late to an appointment... ... can you justifiably call them "a little tardy"?
What are the similarities between feminists and hobos? They both ask for change and never get any.
What did the altar boy say to the Pope? Oh God...
How do cows multiply? With cowculators! 
Ford moved it's production plants to Mexico. Introducing the Burro 350.
Today I found my first grey pubic hair... I got really excited, but not as much as the other people on the bus.


A proud new Dad A proud new Dad sits down to have a drink with his father.

"Well son, now that you've got a kid of your own, I think it's time to give you this"

"Dad, you don't mean-"

"Yes son, I do" *Dad pulls out copy of 1001 Dad Jokes, 5th Edition*

"Dad... I'm honoured..." he says, tears sparkling in his eyes.

"Hi honoured", replies his father. "I'm Dad".
What do you call a bubbly English major? Effervescent
supermarket meet cute A handsome young man gets in line behind a young woman at checkout. He see that she has put a frozen dinner for one and a bottle of wine on the belt. He clears his throat and says "excuse me miss, but you wouldn't by chance be single?" She laughs coyly and says "yes! how can you tell hahaha." and he responds "Well...you're fucking ugly to start."
What do the USPS and Caitlyn Jenner's bf have in common? They both like to stuff mail boxes
I was involved in quite a violent mugging the other day.  On the plus side I made a few bucks.
what class is best taught next to a cliff Physics
Yo mama jokes aren't funny anymore! Yo mama jokes are stupid and extremely unfunny for the obvious reason that it's always the same jokes. Much like memes yo mama jokes always have the same or similar punchline that would usually only make children laugh. There is nothing wrong with this but I just find them unfunny and pointless. 






Just like Yo mama #getRekt
Yoda is bad at telling jokes Why afraid of seven was six?
Eighth nine seven because!
Who's Hillary Clinton's least favorite EDM artist? Disclosure
Why is it best to teach physics on the edge of a cliff? (Original joke) Because that's where students have the most potential.
Nan would always send us texts saying please come round, my arthritis is getting worse; but then they stopped.  So presumably it got better.
A joke my granddad once told me. I always loved this one, my granddad told it to me years ago. Still one of my favourites.



An elderly woman wakes one morning and looks out of her bedroom window. Across the road she sees two men from the local council office slowly making their way up the grassy embankment at the side of the road.



The man in front starts to dig a hole in the embankment and after some time moves forward and begins digging another hole. The second man then proceeds to immediately fill in the hole which the first man had only just finished digging. Perplexed by the odd behaviour of the men, the old woman continues to watch them to see if they will do the same with the next hole.



Surely enough, the men from the council continue this pattern for a good 30 minutes before the old woman, agitated with confusion and curiosity; decides it's time to find out what the men are doing.



"Excuse me young man, what on earth is the point of this, what are you doing?" Says the old woman, "The point?" Says the first man, "The point is to improve the appearance of the roads in this area, to give them a more natural look". 



"Natural?" Exclaims the woman, "How exactly does this make the road look more natural? All you're doing is digging holes and then filling them in again!", the two men exchange a disheartened glance before the second man yells "Well it normally looks better, but the fella who plants the trees is off today!"
Why did the DJ start studying philosophy? Because he was a fan of DEEP HOUSE!
i'm terrible
They're marketing headphones specifically for gorillas now Rumor has it they'll be called Harambeats.  
  
I'm so sorry. 
A doctor was getting ready to accommodate his next patient As he was about to sign his papers, he pulls out his pen from his pocket. To his surprise, what he pulled out instead was a thermometer. The doctor uttered, "Great, some asshole's got my pen".
I recently filed my tax return But my income tax return form has been sent back to me. Can you believe it? 

Just because in response to question 4: Do you have anyone dependent on you? I replied: 2.1 million illegal immigrants, 1.1 million crack heads, 4.4 million unemployables, 900,000 criminals in over 85 prisons, plus 650 idiots in parliament and the whole of the european commission. 

They said this was not an acceptable answer, so who the fuck did i miss out?
Introducing my boyfriend to the family Me: His name is Eric. Say hi Eric!

Eric: Hello

Wife: What the Fuck
Why did the chicken cross the road? To get to the other side is the most common answer, however this answer leaves a great deal of room for interpretation. As noted historian and sociologist Ian Ormwell stated, "A joke cannot be taken at face value; all jests are subjective in their appearance and impact." Contrasting this view, the philosopher Ben Hoovian posited, "All things being equal, a joke must remain in its proper context. A joke with no context is not a joke." The issue was finally settled by post-modernist Irma J. King, who unequivocally stated, "It is the nature of humans to analyze, and all literature created should be subject to analysis." (For a more complete treatment on the subject I strongly recommend reading her seminal book "6000 Years of Humor and Counting: Humor's influence on Human Civilization.")

As for the original chicken joke, the most common interpretation would be to take the joke at face value: we are dealing with a "real" chicken and road. The humor of the joke is based on its simplicity: while most jokes rely on the extraordinary, the humor of this joke is based on the ordinary.

Of course, one does not need to take the joke at face value. The chicken and the road can be viewed metaphorically. What if the chicken is a metaphorical coward, and is a human rather than an avian. The humor is then based not on the randomness of chicken desires, but becomes an example of cowardice and retreat.
Even deeper, the road could be a metaphor for a dividing line, perhaps "the other side" is some kind of forbidden knowledge, perhaps even death. The simplicity of the joke reinforces the listener's ignorance; the joke raises more questions than answers. Sadly, we may never know. Obviously, more research is needed as to WHY the chicken crossed the road. But what kind of road is it? What kind of chicken is it? And if "the other side" is indeed death, what are the implications for our own existence?

Please review my sources for their veracity. Let me know of any discrepancies so I can further treat the topic with more accuracy.
I wish a girl would give me a chance so that I can finally disappoint someone besides my parents.
Wanna know my favorite sitcom? Feminism.
The job interviewer asked me to define turnover. I said, "That's what I do before I go to sleep."
What's the most privileged fish? A Great White shark. 
Why do black men love with their girls call them "Daddy"? It's showing that she knows one day he's going to walk out on her and never come back. 
Professor gets reported for being sexist Professor: **"Must've been some bloody woman!"**
What shape gets rid of curses? A hexagon 
A kid asks for a dog for Christmas. His mom says "No, we're eating  a turkey like always."
Who's the healthiest member of the Army? General Wellbeing
What's Mario's favorite fruit? Peach.
What do a bungee jump and a hooker have in common? They're both cheap, fast, and if the rubber breaks, you're dead.
I learned to ride my bike with no handlebars over the summer. How else am I supposed to catch a Pidgy and get to work on time?
A young man goes into a drug store to buy condoms for the first time. A young man goes into a drug store to buy condoms for the first time.  He brings a box up to the counter and the clerk says, "That will be five dollars plus 15 cents for tax."

The young man screams "Tacks, I thought they stayed on by themselves!"


A long time ago, in a galaxy far away, A Stormtrooper and a Red Shirt start fighting. They're still going at it.
Did you hear about Dr. Dank? he checked meme out at 4:20. Said I have dope. Currently blazing it down the highway in his gr8 van.

creddit 2 my m80
The Fathers cock Father o'conner keeps chickens behind the church in a coop. One sunday he goes to feed them and finds the cock's gone missing. He knows theres a cock fighting ring in the village so at mass he questions the congregation. "has anybody got a cock?'. All the men stand up. "no, no. I meant has anybody seen a cock?" All the women stand up. "No, no, no, that's not what i mean either. Has anybody seen my cock?" 16 altar boys, 2 priests and a goat stood up!
A botanist, an architect, and a computer scientist go for a walk. A botanist, an architect, and a computer scientist go for a walk.  After a bit of walking, they see a tree.

The botanist sees the tree and asks, "Why is that tree here?  It's commonly imported, but trees of that genus don't usually do well in this climate."

The architect says, "I don't know, but I do know that the tensile, impact, and compressive strength of the wood."

The computer scientist says, "That's good and all, but this tree has the root at the bottom and the branches at the top.  Why is it upside down like that?"
Trump helps an old lady. An elderly lady was walking on the golf course on the island of Martha’s Vineyard. She slipped and fell.

Trump, who was behind her by chance, helped her to get up. She thanked him and he replied , “It was a pleasure to help you. Do you recognize me? I am your president. Are you going to vote for me in the next election?”

The elderly woman laughed and replied, ”Not hardly. I fell on my butt, not on my head!”
Why was the communist arrested? He was caught red handed. 
What do you call Harper Lee's Mexican flying animal? Tequila Mockingbird. 
A woman wants to test her boyfriend She thinks he may be unfaithful, so she asks her sister to help her with something.

As the boyfriend pulls up to the house  and enters to find a trail of roses leading up to a closed door. He opens the door to find his girlfriends sister, laying on the bed.

"So, do you fancy it? You know you want to", she asks.

The boyfriend spins round immediately and heads back down stairs towards the front door only to find his girlfriend beaming, "I knew you would never do it!"
She runs over to hug him.

The moral of the story? Always keep your condoms in your car. 
What do you get when toss a hand grenade into a French kitchen? Linoleum blownapart.
Did you hear about the guy who wanted to be reincarnated as a stud? He woke up on a snow tire in Michigan.
What did the leper say to the prostitute.... Keep the tip .
Which internet search engine does Chandler from Friends use? Google, like everybody does.
I just started a business operating charter flights Business is really taking off
Donald Trump tells a joke to Hillary Clinton It was hillaryous
A mother and baby camel are talking one day when the baby camel asks 
"Mom, why have I got these huge three toed feet?"
"Well son, when we trek across the desert your toes will help you to stay on top of the soft sand."
"Okay"
A few minutes later the son asks 
"Mom, why have I got these great long eyelashes?"
"They are there to keep the sand out of your eyes on the trips through the desert."
"Thanks Mom".

After a short while, the son returns and asks
"Mom, why have I got these great big humps on my back?"
"They are there to help us store water for our long treks across the desert."
"That's great Mom. So we have huge feet to stop us sinking, and long eyelashes to keep the sand from our eyes, and these humps to store water, but mom..."
"Yes, son?"
"Why the heck are we in the San Diego zoo?"
I just started working as a taxi driver I'm really going places.
I've got a fungal skin infection It was a little itchy at the start, but now it's really growing on me.
What does an English pimp do, after having tea and crumpets? Tally Hoes
A travelling salesman stopped alongside a field on a country road to rest a few minutes. The man had just closed his eyes when a horse came to the fence and began
to boast about his past. 

"Yes sir, I'm a fine horse. I've run in 25 races and won over $5 million. I keep my trophies in the barn." 

The salesman worked out the value of having a talking horse, found the horse's owner and offered a handsome sum for the animal. 

"Oh, you don't want that horse," said the farmer. 
"Yes I do," said the salesman, "and I'll give you $10,000 for the horse." 
Recognizing a good deal, the farmer said without hesitation, "He's yours." 

While he wrote out his cheque, the salesman asked, "By the way, why
wouldn't I want your horse?" 
"Because," said the farmer, "he's a liar - he hasn't won a race in his
life."
Joke I heard today from the lady running my football pool: A friend of mine has two tickets for the 2017 Super bowl. Box seats plus airfares and hotel accommodation, but he didn't realize when he bought them that this is going to be on the same day as his wedding - so he can't go. 

If you or someone you know would be interested and wanted to go instead of him, it's at St Peter's Church in New York City at 5 pm. 

Her name's Brenda. 

She will be the one in the white dress.

A blind man is tapping his way past the fish market. He stops, takes a deep breath and says, "Good morning, ladies."
The kindergarten teacher would never call on little Timmy in class... One day the teacher said, " I'm going to say a letter of the alphabet, and you raise you hand and tell me a word that starts with that letter." The class looked very excited, but not as much as little Timmy. "A", said the teacher. Little Timmy jumped out of his chair waving his hand in the air.  The teacher didn't call on little Timmy, because she knew there was a curse word that started with "A", and little Timmy was bound to say it.  "B". Again, the teacher didn't call on little Timmy, surely he was just wanting to curse aloud.  The teacher made her way through the alphabet until she got to the letter "R".  Little Timmy was jumping around in the back of the class with his hand raised.  The teacher thought to herself, "I don't think there is a curse word that begins with R".  "Timmy, do you know a word that begins with R", said the teacher.  "Rats!", said little Timmy.  "That is absolutely correct", said the teacher breathing a sigh of relief.  "Rats with big-ass dicks", said Timmy.
A professor told dirty jokes in class the women wanted to protest it. So they decided that in the next time that the professor will start with these kind of jokes they all will leave the class as a protest. 

Somehow the professor heard about the plan. 

In the next lecture, in the beginning of the lecture he said: "In Sweden, a prostitute makes $2000 per night." 

All the women stood up and started to leave the class. So he shouted after them: "Where are you going? The plane to Sweden doesn't take off until the day after tomorrow." 
What's difference between 10 dead babies and Lamborghini? I don't have Lamborghini in my garrage
What did one ball say to the other? Who's the dick in the middle?
Offensive Joke If you let anymore black guys cum on you, they'd call you call you "The Slave Boat" on account of all the black seamen.
Why isn't the Mexican olympic team any good? Anyone who can run jump or swim is already across the border.
You know what they say about small feet... Big truck
2 Nazis walk into a BAR They each get 10 shots
How do sperm cells like their eggs? Over easy. 
A man died of a viagra overdose We couldn't close the casket!
Did you guys hear about the new porno about the Gorilla? It's called Harambe's Out for Dicks
Why was the Black Knight downvoted? Because he ripostes.
What do you call half of Hillary's voters? Deportable
Steve is an aglet expert. His friend John asks if Steve could come over next Saturday and help fix his aglets because the ones he has are weak and wearing quickly. Steve replies,

"Sorry, I'm all tied up this weak end."
(old) How many psychiatrists does it take to change a light bulb? Only one, but the bulb has to really WANT to change.
It stretched halfway around the block and got turned backwards. A punchline walked into a bar.
Britain's new £5 note is washable. Gives new meaning to the phrase "laundering money"
Why are clams bad at sharing? Because they are shellfish.
I was having sex last night and had an epiphany right before I climaxed... I guess you could say that I came to a realisation.
Two lesbians were at a political rally. One turns to the other and says "Donald, you go on in two minutes."

The other says "Thanks, Mike!"
What do you call a wet bear? A drizzly bear.
I've been getting screwed in the ass all day today.... just reached in my back pocket and totally forgot I left those screws in there.
What's the difference between a meeting and a funeral? A funeral is a meeting where you're dead outside as well as in.
Two peanuts walk into a bar... ...one was a salted. 
what do you call a band made of special needs kid System of the downs
Wife: "How would you describe me?" Husband: "ABCDEFGHIJK." 
Wife: "What does that mean?" 
Husband: "Adorable, beautiful, cute, delightful, elegant, fashionable, gorgeous, and hot." 
Wife: "Aw, thank you, but what about IJK?" 
Husband: "I'm just kidding!"
Unemployment jokes aren't funny They just don't work
[NSFW] supplementary testicles Q: what do you call a man with 2 balls?
A: you call him normal
Q: what do you call a man with 3 balls?
A: you call him extraordinary.
Q: what do you call a man with 4 balls?
A: you call him a homosexual because 2 of them aren't his.
What's the difference between babies and onions? I don't cry when I chop up babies.
A couple in the bed. "Let's do it, goodbye Virginity!"

"I'm not sure, what if I get pregnant?"

"You won't, I'm sure"

"Promise me you won't, John"

"I promise, Chris"
Did you hear about the guy that died from a Viagra overdose ? They couldn't close his casket
Bull sees you.... A man asks a farmer near a field, “Sorry sir, would you mind if I crossed your field instead of going around it? You see, I have to catch the 4:23 train.”

The farmer says, “Sure, go right ahead. And if my bull sees you, you’ll even catch the 4:11 one.”
Wanna hear a short joke? Leafy's chin
What's /u/fuckswithducks's least favorite subreddit? /r/uglyduckling
What is anal sex with Hitler called? Visiting the gas chambers
Vegans If 2 vegans argue is it still considered beef?
What's the difference between a Porsche and 100 dead babies I don't have a Porsche in my garage
A Your mom joke. Your mum.
Why was six afraid of seven Because seven was a registered six offender
Miso Soup Me feed you long time.....
I fell asleep at the Cincinnati zoo and fell into the Gorilla pit... Harambe caught me slippin'
How do you make a Kleenex dance? Put a little boogie in it!
Donald Trump gets on a train with 3 well respected leaders of carious countries. The French President, the Columbian President, the Mexican President, and an American named Donald Trump are riding in a train discussing their country's futures. Trying to out do each other, the Columbian President takes out a kilo of 100% pure Cocaine gets a tiny spoon full, takes a sniff and throws it out the window. "Le Dio Una Mano!", exclaims the Columbian President. Astounded, the others in the group ask why he did such a thing. "In Columbia, we have a lot more." A bit later, not to be out-done, the French president pulls out a very expensive bottle of 1775 Sherry. He opens it, he takes a sip, and throws the entire bottle out the window. "C'est la vie", he exclaims. "But no matter, we have much more in France". Then Donald Trump, the American, thinking he can't be out done by these 2 presidents thinks hard for a few minutes. He gets up and opens a nearby door, grabs the Mexican President and throws him off the train.
I remember one time my uncle asked me to spell schadenfreude and I couldn’t.  But he’s dead now and I’m not, so I win.
A businessman decides to leave city life behind. He had spent his entire career working late hours at a stressful job for bosses he hated and decides to give it all up. So he buys a large ranch in central Montana and spends his days raising livestock, maintaining fences, engrossing himself in his new setting. For a time he is content, but weeks pass and loneliness begins to settle in. He feels isolated and begins to wonder if he made a mistake leaving the hustle and bustle of city life. But then, one day, he sees a billow of dust on the horizon. As he continues to watch, it becomes clear that a vehicle is approaching down his lengthy gravel drive at a tremendous speed. He waits, and within seconds a beat up Ford Ranger pickup truck races up to meet him and out jumps a hunched over, unwashed old timer, who extends a dirtied hand. "Yeeeeeeee-haw," exclaims the old man, with a grin that flashes all seven of his teeth, "Welcome to the neighborhood!! Pleased to meet ya! I'm throwing a welcomin' party at my place tonight and 'yer invited! There's gonna be drinkin'! There's gonna be fightin'! And, I tell you what, there's even gonna be screwin'!" The businessman's jaw drops; he's taken aback by the entire encounter, but recovers quickly and stammers his appreciation: "Wow, that sounds amazing! It's been so long since I've seen anyone! What can I bring?" The old man replies, "Well shoot! Bring whatever you want, it's just gonna be you and me!"
A woman has twins and gives them up for adoption.. One of them goes to a family in Egypt and is named "Amal." The other goes to a family in Spain, they name him "Juan". Years later, Juan sends a picture of himself to his mother. Upon receiving the picture, she tells her husband that she wished she also had a picture of Amal. Her husband responds, "But they are twins. If you've seen Juan, you've seen Amal."
A farmer arrives at a local market and asks a merchant, "Can I get some feed for my chickens?" "Sure, how much do you want?" the merchant replies.

"Well I recon I'll need about 9 bags."

The merchant gathers up some feed and hands the farmer 11 bags.

"Uh, I said I only needed 9 bags."

"Oh, I'm so sorry I thought you said 11, my mistake."

"It's no big deal, I'll purchase the extra 2 bags."

"Are you sure? It's really no problem you can just give me the 2 extra bags and I'll restock them."

"No, no, don't worry about it."

"Really we pride ourselves on customer service here are you sure it's OK? Was there any other part of this transaction that was not satisfactory?"

"Its fine but I'm kind of in a rush. Can I pay now so we can wrap this up?"

"Sure, of course, I was just trying to get a little feedback."
Three guys in a plane crash on a deserted island... One day, several years later, a bottle washes up on the beach. One of the guys opens it to reveal that it contains a genie! The two others rush over when they see what's going on.
The genie says "Normally, I give the person who finds my bottle three wishes, but since there are three of you, I'll give you each one."
She turns to the guy who found the bottle and says, "What is it that you desire?"
The man thinks for a moment, then says "Well, I've been on this island now for several years. I'd really just like to be home with my wife and our two children."
The genie smiles, snaps her fingers, and the man disappears. She turns to the second man and says, "And what is it that you desire?"
He says "Well, like the first man, I too have a family that I greatly wish to return to."
The genie wastes no time and in a second there is only one man remaining on the beach.
She says "You have one wish as well, what is it that you desire?"
The man is silent for a moment, then replies "Well, unlike those other two, I never really had a family." He thinks for a moment longer, then says "I guess I'm pretty lonely, I really wish those two guys were back."
Military humor. Not everyone gets it.  A large defense contractor finally succeeded in building a computer able to solve any strategic or tactical problem. Military leaders assembled in front of the new machine and were instructed to feed a difficult tactical problem into it. They described a hypothetical situation to the computer and then asked the pivotal question, "Attack or retreat?"

The computer hummed away for an hour and then came up with the answer, "Yes."

The generals looked at each other, stupefied.

Finally one of them submitted a second request to the computer, "Yes what?"

Instantly the computer responded, "Yes, Sir!."
What did the Doctor tell everyone in the waiting lounge of his clinic? Please be Patient. 
A gay guy goes to a psychiatrist The gay guy starts venting to the psychiatrist about his boyfriends relationship with him and the psychiatrist responds. How have his actions impacted you?
What do you call an ill-tempered German? A sour kraut. 
How much money does it cost to make Captain America cry? One buck
What did Coldplay say when they were asked to run a craps table? "We need a pair of... pair of... pair of dice."
Showier thoughts pt 3 Someone used this water to flush poop and now here I am washing my body with it. 
Shower thoughts pt 2 Surprise birthday parties are great when the person has Alzheimer's.  Especially when you consider the fact to them it's a bunch of strangers giving them presents and eating cake in their house. 
God and the Devil are walking on the beach.... God sees something shiny in the sand.   He picks it up an declares "look its religion".  The Devil says "give it to me, I'll organize it".
What is the one thing you shouldn't do at a funeral? The corpse.
Yo momma Your momma so fat, when she went to a Japanese restaurant, the manager stopped her and said "no no no! We no serve wontons here!"
Don't be lazy. They guy who was in charge of naming vegetables must have gotten really lazy when he named the potato and tomato.  But not as lazy as the fruit guy. He started naming some after its color
Sometimes, I can't help but admire Trump. I mean, for a guy who boasts having ~$10,000,000,000 in money and assets, he does love to show off his tokens.
Shower thoughts If I get two pairs of jeans. Will it be a quad of jeans. Who would have that many legs..... Do spiders wear pants. 
Why was three afraid of four Cause four skinned five
I failed my Biology test yesterday I was asked to name a parasite currently living in Britain. 

Apparently 'Muslims' isn't the correct answer. 
Why does no one like to hang out with Darth Vader? Because He force-jokes
RJ Morris Survey of Smokers The survey among male smokers aged 18-26 showed that 92.6% of smokers who tried Camels, still preferred women.
Awesome career pt 2 When I hear the word sex offender it makes me think of a sex defender like some guy who defends our right to have sex. Like he goes to gay pride parades and he yells things like "let them bang". He goes around bars and clubs passing out condoms so people can get laid. Hangs out in comic book shops to help nerds loose their virginity. He's like a superhero and purity rings are like his kryptonite.  He's like " no abstinence my only weakness" " quick someone take your pants off" 
What do you call a belt made of watches? A waist of time
Why doesn't Gordon Ramsey have intercourse without a condom? Because its fucking raw.
Please stop making jokes about the Twin Towers. 9 out of 11 people find it offensive.
Will Trump need his supporters after the election? Of course not, he doesn't need one now. Little fingers, remember?
what did the pirate say on his 80th birthday? aye matey
A man walks into a bar and sees a jar of coins The man asks the bartender what the jar of coins is for. The bartender tells the man that they have a horse in the stable out back, and if the man can make the horse laugh, he gets to keep the jar of coins which is full to the brim, but has to pay $1 for every attempt at making the horse laugh. The man decides to have a go and sure enough, leaves the stable with the horse laughing hysterically. He finishes his drink and takes the jar home with him.

Fast forward a couple months, the man enters the bar again to see that the jar is full. He asks the bartender if he can have another go at making the horse laugh. The bartender says he can, but this time he has to make the horse cry. Again, the man enters the stable, and upon leaving, the bartender notices that the horse is crying. As the man picks up the jar of coins, the bartender asks - "So how did you do it? No one has ever managed to achieve it!" 
The man replies: 
"Well you see, the first time i told the horse my penis was bigger than his"

"The second time, I showed him."
Phrases The phrase "I love kids" can lead to two diffent outcomes. 
Tell it to a girl and she'll like you more and considered you as "husband material". Tell it to a cop and you get something diffent. You might end up on a "special" list and you gain a title that you now have to announce to your neighbors 
CARTOON LAWS OF PHYSICS Cartoon Law I

Any body suspended in space will remain in space until made aware
of its situation.

Daffy Duck steps off a cliff, expecting further pasture land.  He
loiters in midair, soliloquizing flippantly, until he chances to
look down.  At this point, the familiar principle of 32 feet per
second per second takes over.

Cartoon Law II

Any body in motion will tend to remain in motion until solid matter
intervenes suddenly. Whether shot from a cannon or in hot pursuit
on foot, cartoon characters are so absolute in their momentum that
only a telephone pole or an outsize boulder retards their forward
motion absolutely.  Sir Isaac Newton called this sudden termination
of motion the stooge's surcease.

Cartoon Law III

Any body passing through solid matter will leave a perforation
conforming to its perimeter.

Also called the silhouette of passage, this phenomenon is the
speciality of victims of directed-pressure explosions and of
reckless cowards who are so eager to escape that they exit directly
through the wall of a house, leaving a cookie-cutout-perfect hole. 
The threat of skunks or matrimony often catalyzes this reaction.

Awesome career. I was chatting with a buddy of mine who I haven't seen in a while. I asked what he was doing for a living and he said he films animals mating. I said "oh you document the mating cycles of animals". He said "no I'm an animal porn director". " yesterday we just finished one called "lioness eats baby elephant and gets banged by a lion and a elephant". "It's huge in Africa" 
A family is at the dinner table The son asks the father, “Dad, how many kinds of boobs are there?” The father, surprised, answers, “Well, son, a woman goes through three phases. In her 20s, a woman’s breasts are like melons, round and firm. In her 30s and 40s, they are like pears, still nice, hanging a bit. After 50, they are like onions.” “Onions?” the son asks. “Yes. You see them and they make you cry.” This infuriated his wife and daughter. The daughter asks, “Mom, how many different kinds of willies are there?” The mother smiles and says, “Well, dear, a man goes through three phases also. In his 20s, his willy is like an oak tree, mighty and hard. In his 30s and 40s, it’s like a birch, flexible but reliable. After his 50s, it’s like a Christmas tree.” “A Christmas tree?” the daughter asks. “Yes, dead from the root up and the balls are just for decoration.” - 
What's the difference between Sammy and Scooby-Doo? Scooby-Doo doesn't have a dog.
I found the one When I saw her my knees got weak and my vision got blurry. That's when I realized I drunk the wrong glass. 
From the Cold War archives In the 1950s, when Cold War tensions were at their height, the Soviet Red Army unexpectedly placed an order with the U.S. Defense Department's procurement office.  The order asked for five million boxes of twelve-inch long condoms.  The unusual request was sent up the chain to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, where it was heatedly discussed.  Finally, a decision was passed back down to the procurement office.  "Fill the order, but stamp all the boxes 'Medium'". 
I asked a chinese girl for her number She said, "Sex! Sex! Sex! Free sex tonight!" I said, "Wow!" Then her friend said, "She means 666-3629."
How did the sperm cross the road? I put the wrong socks on today. 

^(credit to /u/jackster_)
A single word can make a heart open. That word is "scalpel."
what's the stupidest animal in the jungle The polar bear.
What is bigfoots favorite thing to eat? Squash
I have a really bad temper. I once punched a man with a lazy eye just for looking at me wrong. 
have you seen the clown that hides from arseholes in asda? no? well then...
I have information that will lead to Hillary Clinton's arrest. [deleted]
So a pair of Beats headphones walk into a bar... So a pair of Beats walk into a bar full of audiophiles. The bartender says "we don't like your kind 'round here" and the pair of Beats say "sorry man, were not looking for any treble"
My friends got tired of me telling cow jokes They didn't find them very amoosing.
The old lady... "The old lady fell into the well"
"But how?"
"She did not see that well"
What's the definition of divorce? The screwing you get for the screwing you got!
Stephen Hawking wrote another book, 
It’s about time.
My doctor told me to stop masturbating When I asked him why he said, "So I can examine you."
[Long but worth it] A city boy decides he wants to go hunting one day... ...so he goes to the pawn shop and, not knowing any better, buys a handgun. He goes out into the woods looking for something to shoot at when he comes to a clearing and sees on the other side a bear!  Imagining a helluva hunting story, he takes aim, shoots until he's out of bullets, and then runs across the clearing to claim his prize. He looks around behind the bushes and doesn't see anything. Then he feels a tap on his shoulder. 

He spins around and there's the bear! The bear says, "Look, buddy, I don't really appreciate being shot at. But I can see that you're new at this whole hunting thing so I'm going to give you a choice. You can let me maul you... Or you can let me fuck you in the ass."  The guy thinks it over and decides he can always come back and kill the bear tomorrow, so he agrees to option 2. The bear does his thing and the guy goes home. 

The next morning, the guy wakes up, sore as hell and pissed off. He limps to the pawn shop and buys himself a hunting rifle. He heads back out into the woods and soon finds himself at the same clearing. Sure enough, there's the bear on the other side. Again, he shoots every bullet he has and then runs over to make sure he got the bear this time. But once again, he feels a tap on his shoulder and behind him is the bear, looking pretty pissed off himself. "Ok asshole, same deal," says the bear. Figuring he'll get the bear tomorrow for sure, the guy agrees to be ass-raped again. So the bear does his thing, and the guy goes home. 

The next day, the guy is fucking determined. He hobbles back to the pawn shop and buys a whole case of grenades. He heads back to the woods and just starts tossing them everywhere. After the smoke clears, he goes back to where the clearing used to be, hoping to find some charred fur or bear chunks to prove he's killed the bear this time.  But he feels a tap on his shoulder *again* and the bear says, "son, you aren't in this for the hunting, are you?"
A man walks into a bar And sits down and announces to the bartender that he can tell the age of any scotch just by drinking it. The bartender thinks this guy is full of shit so he goes and gets the cheap 12 year stuff and pours a glass. The guy takes it, sniffs it, and takes a drink. He then proclaims, "well that's a 12 year old glass of scotch".

The bartender think it's just a lucky guess so he goes and gets a 20 year old bottle and pours the guy a drink. The guy takes it, sniffs it, and takes a drink. He then says, "oh well that's a 20 year old glass of scotch".

So now the bartender is kinda impressed so he goes into the back cabinet and gets a nice 45 year old bottle that he keeps for special occasions. He pours the guy a drink and then hands it to him. The man takes it, sniffs it, and drinks it. He proclaims, "well that's a 45 year old bottle of scotch!". 

The bartender is now amazed and a small crowd is beginning to form. The bartender goes in the back room and takes out the 75 year old bottle of scotch. He pours the glass in the backroom so there's no chance this man can see the label. He hands the guy the drink and once again: he takes it, sniffs it, and drinks it. The man then correctly proclaims, "that's a 75 year old bottle of scotch!". 

Now the bar is in a slight uproar and the man has a big grin on his face. A man from the crowd goes, "Hear try this one!". The man takes it and drinks it right away and exclaims, "ugh this tastes like piss!". The man from the crowd responds, "Good! Now how old am I?"
Luke Skywalker visits Dr. Worm on the waiting room he is with a tauntaun called Cold. 
Once he goes inside the doctor asks, are you Cold? and he replies , no I'm Luke, Worm. 
I don't always seduce hispanic Star Trek fans... but when I do, I prefer dos Trekkies
What is Bruce Lee's favorite food? Whoppaaah
A bus is going from Texas to South Carolina at night time. When daylight comes a fellow passenger asks the driver: 'hey, that was a smooth ride last night except for that bit when it got all bumpy. What was all that about'? The driver says: 'well, we ran over some blacks'. The passenger says: 'seriously? But that lasted over half an hour'. The driver replied: 'yeah, that's cause we had to drive into the fields to get them'.
What do fat people do in the summer? Stink
I used to file my nails Now I just chuck them away
What do you call a group of white, racist, seal hating, Trump supporting bears? A basket of depolarbears
hey, are you from Thailand? Cause you can Thailandeez nuts! Got EEM
Joke mind blown allahu=6 Akbar=5 6-5=1

9/11   1+11=12.   12-9=3


Illuminati did 9/11 
What crime did the viticulturist get imprisoned for? Grape.
What Video Game do feminists LOVE to play? No MAN'S sky!
Helping a friend So I got a text from my friend this morning telling me he was going to kill himself.

Do I reply? Or just leave him hanging.
Since when did our son hire hookers Said mom, dad replys: since I hired you.
Why couldn't the chemist laugh at the queens fart? Because noble gases are nonreactive.

Why was the incontinent sex addict confused? He couldn't tell if he was coming or going!
Where do they send all the horny knights? Came-a-lot.
How do you pick up a Jewish girl? With a broom and dustpan.
What college football date usually comes in April? 
The one who buys her a drink.
What do you call the action where a dead guy falls out of a car and you have to put him back in? A rehearsal
I once knew a guy married to a nun... He got nun in the morning, nun in the evening, and nun at night. Poor fella.
Why did Adele cross the road? To say hello from the other side.
The parrot A woman walks in to a pet shop, looking to buy a parrot.

-We have a couple of parrots for sale, the shopkeeper says.
-This one is 1000 bucks, he says, pointing ro a red parrot. -This one is 500, pointing to a yellow parrot.
-Hmm, that's expensive, the woman says. -You don't have anything cheaper?
-Oh, I almost forgot. We have one in the back. It's really beautfiful. The only drawback is that it used to live in a brothel. You can have it for 5 dollars.
-Great, I'll take it.

The woman brings the bird home. As soon as the bird is taken out of the cage it screams: - Fuck yea, new brothel!
The woman laughs.

Then her two daughters enter the room.
The parrot screams again: - Fuck yea, new hookers!
All three women laugh.

Later on that day, her husband comes home, eager to see the new bird. And the parrot screams: - Frank, I haven't seen you for weeks!
Don't read part A backwards Its A trap
What do you call a group of polar bears that support Donald Trump? A basket of depolarbears
A christian walks into a bar A christian walks into a bar, then a jew walks into a bar, then a muslim walks into an ALLAHU AKBAR



BOOM
Did you hear about the Cessna plane that crashed in a cemetery Ina Poland? They found 208 dead so far!
A series of columns is called a colonnade... A series of columns is called a colonnade, and a series of arches is called an arcade.  
What do you call a series of citrus?  
A lemonade.
I pirate made a tinder account looking for A chest with some booty
Pope came to the balcony and said "Love All" People were ecstatic. then he threw a tennis ball in the crowd and said 15-love
In a bar, there's a guy hitting on a cute Banker girl The guy brags about all his riches and possessions, but he got shot down by the girl immediately.

The girl said, "Leave me a loan!"

The guy noticed the wordplay, he praised the girl. "That's a pretty clever pun! ...But not as pretty as you"

The girl, now irritated, said. "I'm not kidding, leave me a loan! I lost interest."


A New Yorker, an Atlantan, an Indianan, and an Idahoan are riding in a van. A New Yorker, an Atlantan, an Indianan, and an Idahoan are riding in a van. The Idahoan finds a bag of potatoes in the van, opens the door, and tosses it out. 
"Why did you do that?" the others ask.
"Oh, potatoes!" he answers. "They're everywhere you look in Idaho, can't get away from them, always right there in your face!"
They ride on, until the Indianan finds a bag of corn in the van, opens the door, and tosses it out.
"Why did you do that?" the others ask.
"Oh, corn!" he answers. "It's everywhere you look in Indiana, can't get away from it, always right there in your face!"
They ride on, until the Atlantan opens the door, and tosses out the New Yorker.
Easiest Way Of Getting Married A Boy Asked His Girlfriend’s Dad,
Boy: “Its Just A Formality, But I Still Want To Ask You. Can I Marry Your Daughter?”
The Dad Gets Shocked And Asks: “Who Said Its Just A Formality?”
The Boy Replies: “The Gynecologist.”
After the election Mr. President Sanders, you broke your promises!  
Sanders: "That's nor problem Sir, you get a new one for free!"
What do you call a sarcastic criminal who's walking down stairs? A condescending con descending.
What is Hillary's favorite pizza? Little seizures.
A lawyer runs a stop sign and gets pulled over by a sheriff. He thinks he's smarter being a big shot lawyer from New York and has a better education than an sheriff from West Virginia. The sheriff asks for license and registration. 

The lawyer asks, "What for?" 

The sheriff responds, "You didn't come to a complete stop at the stop sign." 

The lawyer says, "I slowed down and no one was coming." 

"You still didn't come to a complete stop. License and registration please," says the sheriff impatiently. 

The lawyer says, "If you can show me the legal difference between slow down and stop, I'll give you my license and registration and you can give me the ticket. If not, you let me go and don't give me the ticket." 

The sheriff says, "That sounds fair, please exit your vehicle." 

The lawyer steps out and the sheriff takes out his nightstick and starts beating the lawyer with it. 

The sheriff says, "Do you want me to stop or just slow down?"
An old married couple go out for a sail the wife falls overboard and yells for help. The husband moves to the edge of the boat and dangles his penis over the edge. His wife screams your dick is too short to use for a rope! The old man smiles and says it's meant to be a snorkel 
Hail Mungus Leonardo da vinci, Stephen Hawking and Hugh Mungus, were out riding in the car when it crashed into a tree.

Before anyone knows it, the three men found themselves standing before the pearly gates of Heaven, where St. Peter and the Devil were standing nearby.

"Gentlemen," the Devil started, "Due to the fact that Heaven is now overcrowded, St. Peter has agreed to limit the number of people entering Heaven. If anyone of you can ask me a question which I don't know or cannot answer, then you're worthy enough to go to Heaven; if not, then you'll come with me to Hell."

Da Vinci then stepped up, "Okay, give me the most comprehensive report on Socrates' teachings."
With a snap of his finger, a stack of paper appeared next to the Devil. Da Vinci read it and concluded it was correct.
"Then, go to Hell!" With another snap of his finger, he disappeared.

Hawking then asked, "Give me the most complicated formula ever theorized!"
With a snap of his finger, another stack of paper appeared next to the Devil. He read it and reluctantly agreed it was correct.
"Then, go to Hell!" With another snap of his finger, the scientist disappeared too.

Hugh Mungus then stepped forward and said, "Bring me a chair!" 

The Devil brought forward a chair. "Drill 7 holes on the seat." The Devil did just that. He then sat on the chair and let out a very loud fart. Standing up, he asked, "Which hole did my fart come out from?" 

The Devil inspected the seat and said, "The third hole from the right."

"Wrong," said Hugh, "It's from my asshole." And he went to heaven.
What's your name? Hugh Mungus
Dear Algebra... Stop asking us to find your ex,
She's gone bro.
Where does wikileaks keep getting all those DNC emails from? Someone keeps Putin them there.
If the Loch Ness Monster exists, does that also mean it has a favourite vegetable? Loch Ness' celery.
I was stung by a bee the other day £20 for a jar of honey
There's a French guy with tourettes syndrome who keeps yelling goodbye at random people. There's much adieu about nothing. 
I don't understand why the Catholic Church is so against gay pride After all, their central figure was nailed by four Roman guys.
Hey Claire how's it goi- DID YOU ASSUME MY GENDER YOU SEXIST PIG?
If I had a dollar for every gender... I'd have a $1.50 because women don't deserve rights.
The Queen visits a major hospital to open a new ward. She is shown around first by a nurse so she can inspect the facilities.

On her way, she hears orgasmic groans coming from a nearby room.

She goes to the room to investigate and, upon arriving, finds that a man is masturbating on the bed.

She asks the nurse "Why is that man doing that?"

The nurse replies "Oh, he's got to relieve himself every so often because he has a disorder."

"Oh, OK then," the queen said, and moved on, but on the way she hears more orgasmic groans.

She looks in the room and sees a nurse giving a man a blowjob.

The queen asks her escort "Why is that nurse giving that man a blowjob?"

Her nurse escort says "Oh, he's got the same disorder as the man before, only this one's got health insurance!"
How do you make a holy water? You boil the hell out of it. 
I shot my first turkey today... ..It sure scared the hell out of everyone in the frozen food section 
What do Viagra and Disney World have in common? A one-hour wait for a two-minute ride
I am glad ... that everyone reading this is on the same page.
An owl was sitting in a tree saying "How? How?" He was lysdexic.
What does Spiderman like to get high on? Mary Jane
What kind of pictures do turtles take? Shellfies!


What's the stickiest kind of sugar? Gluecose.
Scientists have found out... after they were shown the exit.
I have a friend who rarely shows up to dinner dates but when he does only eats battered oriental prawns. He's Tempura mental.
Minesweeper What Hitler called his cleaning lady.
A German asks for a martini...  "Dry?" asks the barman.  

He replies, "Nein, just one."
What did Hillary Clinton's running mate say when reporters asked him his name? "There are some who call me...Tim"
Two nuns are sitting on a park bench... Two nuns are sitting on a park bench. A man in a trench coat runs up and flashes them.  The first nun has a stroke. The second nun tried but she couldn't reach.
What four letter word starts with F ends in K and if you can't get it you have to use your hands or fingers...? A fork
Why was the Taiwanese business man so stressed out? Because he had a Taipei personality.
A man walks into a bar and had a big Blue head He sits down, orders a drink. The bartender eyes him warily, but gets him what he wants. The man sits sipping the drink, idly watching the soccer game on the bar television. After a while, he runs dry and orders another.

*"Tell you what,"* says the bartender, *"this next one's on the house -- but you've got to tell me what happened to your head. I don't mean to be rude there, but..."*

The man smiles. *"No, not at all. I get this all the time...*

...Well, it started with the Gulf War. I was a young kid fresh out of high school, but I was poor. I needed money for college, and the Army looked like a good way out of the ghetto. But then they shipped me over to Kuwait. My platoon took some heavy fire during Desert Storm, and I was separated from them.

I wandered the desert for days, with only the contents of my pack to sustain me. Sand. Sand was all I could think about. Everything else ceased to exist out there. I can only progress slowly, because I have to hide in my tent every time when even the smallest sandstorm comes around. I kept thinking, may be there are not just oases, nomads, and pompous cities in this desert. Supposedly there are ancient ruins as well. But until now now I only found lonely pillars scattered around the desert. Still my hopes were not disappointed, for now. I found a group of nomads, who were exceptionally friendly and hospitable. I decided to spend some time with them, before I set out again. Things went well, but I had nightmares on most nights. All the wandering in the desert must have exhausted me so much. I dreamt of large desert scorpion made of sand, some times it would be a large eagle chasing me into a big labyrinth.

During one such sleepless night, I saw a mysterious man. Exhausted and wounded, was seeking refuge in our camp. Just before dying, he told me about a river whose waters bestow immortality on whoever drinks from it. The river is next to a place called the City of the Immortals. Determined to find it, I thanked my nomad friends and set out to find this City. 

The days were uneventful, but the nights began to terrify me. I know that the majority of deserts are rife with life. But it is frightening to hear the sand move in the silence of night. And sometimes I found footprints in the morning near my tent, and they were definitively human. Maybe someone is just following, maybe one of the kids of one of my nomadic friends. But they grew in number the closer I got to the city, and they are always fresh. And I also suddenly heard quiet whispering one night, only heard when I almost fell asleep. I woke up from the nightmare to find myself tied up in a small recess on the side of a mountain inhabited by Troglodytes. I don't know how I got there, but I managed to free myself and I could see the City of the Immortals in the distance. I assumed I can walk towards it, but one Troglodyte was already following me. I had to run as fast as I could to get away from him. At last I reached the City of the Immortals.

The City of the Immortals is an immense labyrinth with dead-end passages, inverted stairways, and many chaotic architectural structures. I was Horrified and repulsed by the city, but decided to get inside, because the Troglodyte was chasing me. I eventually escaped the city only to find the Troglodyte waiting on the other side. I was exhausted. I didn't want to run anymore. I surrendered myself to him. To his will. But it turned out that he really was a Genie, and that the Troglodytes are the Immortals, having destroyed the original City of the Immortals and replaced it with the labyrinthine.

'I am the Genie of the labyrinth' said the entity. 'For finding your way out of the labyrinth, I shall grant you three wishes. What is your first wish?'

I was incredulous, of course. I deduced I must be hallucinating after all this running and exhaustion, and that this was desert madness. I decided to test the mirage. 'Alright,' I tasked it, 'I wish for a wallet with a million dollars in it, that I can never lose, and whenever I take any money out of it the sum is immediately replenished.'

'Your wish is granted!' said the Genie. I felt a bulge in one of my uniform pockets. Reaching in, I pulled out a new wallet, stuffed to bursting with crisp, new bills. I counted them -- sure enough, it was a million dollars. I ripped up the bills, cast them to the winds, and threw the wallet as hard as I could. The moment it was beyond my sight, it teleported instantaneously back to my pocket, refilled with another million dollars.

'What is you second wish?'

I pondered the notion for a long moment, assessing my needs. 'Genie,' I said, 'for my second wish, I want to be transported to a cool, abandoned palace, into a harem room with a hundred beautiful young virgins who will all fall madly in love with me at first sight, before a buffet table set with a feast fit for a Persian king.'

'Your wish is granted!' Poof! I found myself in a royal harem, escaped from the heat of the desert. All around me, nubile girls eyed me with keen interest. In front of me, every conceivable type of meat was roasted to perfect tenderness, set with all the appetizers, side-dishes, salads, soups, and desserts of the four corners of the globe.

I dined until I was near-bloated, and then I had a lot of sex. I mean a lot. Several hours later, laying upon a bed of feathers, brown and blonde and red haired beauties nuzzling into me like puppies at their mother's underbelly, the Genie stood before me, looking down in satisfaction at his work so far.

'What is your third wish?'

I thought long and hard. Truly, this last wish tasked the very limits of my imagination, my beliefs, my ethics, my philosophy. Hours passed in silence, save for the gentle snoring of the ladies surrounding me.

At last, I spoke. 'Genie, for my third wish, I want a big Blue head.' "
Why are there walls around a cemetery? Because people are dying to get in.
For all you non-native English speakers out there... "Read" is pronounced like "lead", while "read" is pronounced like "lead". 
Hi Freeze I'm Batman.
What's Hillary Clinton's favorite pizza place? Little Seizures.
What's the difference between a tuna, a piano, and some glue? You can tuna piano but you can't piano tuna!
What did one eyeball say to the other? Between you and me, something smells.
My doctor told me I had Type A blood But apparently it was a typo
Rocky Mountain Oysters. An American touring Spain stopped at a local restaurant following a day of sightseeing. While sipping his sangria, he noticed a sizzling, scrumptious looking platter being served at the next table. Not only did it look good, the smell was wonderful.

He asked the waiter, “What is that you just served?”

The waiter replied, ” Ah senor, you have excellent taste! Those are bulls testicles from the bull fight this morning. A delicacy!”

The American, though momentarily daunted, said, “What the hell, I’m on vacation! Bring me an order!”
 
The waiter replied, “I am so sorry, senor. There is only one serving per day because there is only one bull fight each morning. If you come early tomorrow and place your order, we will be sure to save you this delicacy!”

The next morning, the American returned, placed his order, and then that evening he was served the one and only special delicacy of the day. After a few bites, and inspecting the contents of his platter, he called to the waiter and said, “These are delicious, but they are much, much smaller than the ones I saw you serve yesterday!”

The waiter shrugged his shoulders and replied, “Si, senor. Sometimes the bull wins.”
Does your mom work at McDonald's? Cuz i quarter-pounded her last night
Have you been to the two shop oddities market? It's a little bazaar.
A man walks into chemist's and says, "Can I have a bar of soap please?" The chemist asks "Do you want it scented?"
The man replies " No, I will take it with me now."
Dogs can't use MRI machines But Catscan
A russian joke: Some people in Mosow got stuck on a ride at an amusement park! That entire country is got stuck on a ride! On something between a haunted mansion and a house of funny mirrors!
New job.. Did you guys hear about Micheal J. Fox's new job?

He is the paint mixer at home depot.
Wife: We're not talking over the radio. This relationship is over. Husband: This relationship is what? Over.
You can make jokes about anything, except Mexicans That's crossing the border.
A young man goes into a drugstore to buy condoms The pharmacist says the condoms come in packs of 3, 9 or 12 and asks which the young man wants.

"Well," he said, "I've been seeing this girl for a while and she's really hot. I want the condoms because I think tonight's "the" night. We're having dinner with her parents, and then we're going out. And I've got a feeling I'm gonna get lucky after that. Once she's had me, she'll want me all the time, so you'd better give me the 12 pack."

The young man makes his purchase and leaves.

Later that evening, he sits down to dinner with his girlfriend and her parent's. He asks if he might give the blessing, and they agree. He begins the prayer, but continues praying for several minutes.

The girl leans over and says, "You never told me that you were such a religious person." 

He leans over to her and whispers, "You never told me that your father is a pharmacist."
A plane leaves JFK airport under the control of a Jewish captain, Josh Weinberg. It is the first time he has flown with his Chinese co-pilot Bo Weng and an awkward silence between the two seems to indicate a mutual dislike.

After this protracted silence has continued for a while, the Captain mutters, 'I don't like the Chinese.. .' 

'No rike Chinese?' asks the copilot, 'why not?'

'You people bombed Pearl Harbour , that's why!'

'No, no', the co-pilot protests, 'Chinese not bomb Per Hahbah. That Japanese, not Chinese. Japanese do that'.

'Japanese, Chinese, Vietnamese....Doesn't matter to me: you're all alike!'

The silence continues on until the co-pilot suddenly announces 'I no rike Jews anyway' .

'Oh yeah, and why not?' asks the captain.

'Jews sink Titanic' says the co-pilot.

'You're nuts' exclaims the captain, 'Jews didn't sink the Titanic!' , 'It was an iceberg!'

'Iceberg, Goldberg, Greenberg, Rosenberg, no mattah to me...all bruddy same!!'
I've decided to teach postcolonial theory instead of seventeenth-century poetry. Because, you know, easier Said than Donne.
Did you know what happened to the daredevil who jumped from a 100Ft into a tank? He died.
The was once a Jester... A jester was attempting to make the king laugh in every way he could think of. He tried ticking, telling the king funny stories, he even did some stand-up bits from Brian Regan, but nothing worked. 

In the Jester's last attempt, he told a joke, hoping that the King would laugh, at least once. 

The King was furious at the joke. He ordered the Jester to be put to death, but before he could, the Jester exclaimed, "It was Jest a joke!"
2 Egyptians noticed their farts smelled the same. They had a Tutankhamen. 
A Roman walks into the bar... ...holds up two fingers, and says, “Five beers, please.”
I bought myself an ant farm... ... them fellas didn’t grow shit.
A woman gets on a bus with her baby The bus driver says: *''Ugh, that's the ugliest baby I've ever seen!''* 

The woman walks to the rear of the bus and sits down, fuming. 

She says to a man next to her: *''The driver just insulted me!''* 

The man says: *''You go up there and tell him off. Go on, I'll hold your monkey for you.''*

&nbsp;

^^^Yes ^^^it ^^^is ^^^a ^^^stolen ^^^joke
An insight into bakers' lives Bakers trade recipes on a knead to know basis. 