A man gets off work early... After a long day on the job, a construction worker makes his way home. He is happy to find the bus goes express, and he gets to his apartment building in record time. He walks up the four flights of stairs, thinking about how lucky he is to see his wife and drink a cold beer. He reaches his door but finds it locked. He knocks, and as he leans in he hears his wife moaning, along with the sounds of some guy. Well, he goes red with rage and starts pounding on the door. After a minute his wife opens the door, a blanket wrapped around her naked body. "It's not what you think!" she screams, but he ignores her, pushing past to see if he can find the guy. The apartment is only one room, with a bathroom off to the side, so there's not a lot of places to hide. The husband looks under the bed, peeks into the shower, but can't find the guy. Then he notices the window is open. He runs over, looks out, and sees a guy in his shorts hanging from the window below him. The husband starts yelling, "I'll kill you!", pulling tools off his belt and throwing them at the guy, until the guy suddenly loses his grip and falls. But since the fall is only three stories, when he lands he only breaks his legs. The husband is furious. He looks around for something to throw, and the closest and biggest thing he finds is the fridge. He pulls it to the window and then pushes it out, and it falls right on the guy, killing him instantly. However, in doing this, the husband works himself up so much he has a heart attack and also dies. 


The next thing he knows the husband is standing in line at the pearly gates. Saint Peter beckons him forward and asks, "Well my son, how did you die?"

"Well," replies the husband " I came home from a hard day at work and found my wife cheating on me. I was so angry that when I found the guy hanging outside the window I threw things at him until he fell. However, he only broke his legs, and I wasn't satisfied, so instead I grabbed the fridge and pushed it out onto him. But in doing this, I had a heart attack, and here I am."

"Oh boy." Replied Saint Peter "Well, while I'm sad that your wife was not true, it is wrong to kill. I'm afraid you have to go to hell." With that, the husband is ushered off to hell. 

Saint Peter looks at the next man in line and beckons him forward. "And how did you die, my son?"

The guy looks perplexed. "It was the strangest thing, sir. I was sitting at home trying to work out, but my apartment is so small I have to be creative and do pull ups outside my window. Well, I was doing this like normal, when all of a sudden a crazy guy starts throwing things at me. I lost my grip and fell, and somehow by God's grace, I didn't die! I started thanking God, but then the guy suddenly pushed out a fridge, and it landed directly on me!"

Saint Peter scratches his head. "I am sorry, son. You lived a good life, and as a reward, you get to go to heaven." And with that, the guy is ushered to heaven. 

Saint Peter beckons the next person in line, who walks up. "How did you die, my son?"

The man replies, "Well, picture this: You're hiding in a fridge..."   
How did the deaf teacher give his deaf students their homework? He assigned it
I have evidence that the mods on r/jokes are censoring posts they dont like! More info in post! [removed]
When robots transform, they turn into cars. But what do cars turn into? Laneways.
I wish i had 2 cars. One delorean and some other car. I would usually drive with the latter, and with delorean only from time to time.
You won't believe what this group of teenage girls did! JK, that was just clique-bait
They say 1 in 10 people live next to a child sex offender Fortunately for me, I live next to two sexy 13 year olds! 
Do you know what pisses redditors off? [deleted]

... and reposts
Did you hear that the Energizer Bunny was arrested? It's ok; he wasn't charged.
I want to share everything with you. Man: I want to share everything with you.
Woman: Let’s start from your bank account.


Eventually, all hipsters will age and end up needing canes to help them walk... ...ironically.
Man: I'll take a rum and coke Bartender: Is pepsi ok?
Man: Yeah, that'll do.
Bartender: *hands him coke and pepsi*
What do you call an alligator in a vest? An investigator. DA DUM TSS. 
A hat for kirk My mum wanted to knit a hat for Captain Kirk of the USS enterprise, but it is quite tricky for someone who has three ears!

His left ear, his right ear and his final front-ear.
After a long day Johnny went to bed. He kissed his wife on the cheek and closed his eyes, now sleeping. 
Suddenly he woke up with a quiver and saw a beardy old man with a cowl beside him.
"Who are you and what the hell are you doing in my bedroom?" he screamed.
"We are no longer in your bedroom." "I'm saint peter and you are in heaven, Johnny."
"What? I'm dead? But I'm too young to die!" "If I'm dead, I demand you to take me back!" Said Johnny.
Saint Peter scratched his beard. 
"It's not that easy. There's going to be a lot of paper work if we're going to
send anyone back... But sure. You can go back, but only as either a fish or a hen."
Johnny never liked swimming, his only option was the hen, and after all, the though of being one wasn't too bad according to him. If he can find another nice rooster he may as well have a good life. 
"I want to be a hen." He said.
As in a blink of an eye Johnny was in a chicken farm, feathered
and neighbouring. Everything seemed fine except he had a 
celestial pressure in his ass. He saw the farm rooster running towards him. 
"Hey, you must be the new hen. What's up? Asked the farm rooster.
"Hello! I'm fine, but I feel an immense pain in my ass." said Johan.
"That's the ovulation... You've never had an egg, right?"
"Nope, so... how do I do it?"
"Just cackle twice and then squeeze." Said the rooster.
Johnny cackled twice and pinched. Bam, there was the egg 
lying on the ground. Wow, though Johnny. This was cool.
He cackled again and pinched, another egg!
The third time he cackled he heard his wife crying, "Wake up
for gods sake, you are shitting down the entire bed!"
**Moral of story: Don't trust anything just cause a hefty rooster
said something.**

The truth needs to be told. I tried to stay out of the conversation, but can't restrain my feelings any longer. That incredibly arrogant man who cheated his way to victory and now thinks that he can impose his will on the entirety of America. He and his gorgeous foreign-born former model wife. And those angry, bitter people that he represents. No matter how many scandals and lawsuits he gets involved in, he still flaunts his obnoxious smile into our tv screens. A majority of Americans cannot stand you! You may fancy yourself the greatest patriot, but your days in power are numbered! Go away Tom Brady, go away!!
Doctor: "I'm sorry but you suffer from a terminal illness and only have 10 to live" Patient: "What? 10 What? Years? Weeks?!!"

Doctor: "Nine"
God was talking to Adam... And told him, "I will make you a wonderful partner. Her name will be Wonderful. She will cook all your meals, wash your clothes, clean up after you, agree with everything you say, and best of all, she will never complain".

"That's great" said Adam. "What will she cost me?"

"An arm and a leg"

Adam thinks for a minute, then says "What can I get for a rib?
A blond and a brunette was watching the news Showing was a man standing on top of a tall building yelling that he's gona jump.

The brunette looks at the blond and says "I bet you 200 dollars that guy is gona jump" 

The blond thinks for a few seconds and takes the bet.

A few seconds later the man jumps off the building and just smashes into the car parked at the bottom of the building.

The blond fondles in her hand bag and hands over the 200dollars.

The next day the Brunette meets up with the blond again and hands her back the money explaining.
"I'm sorry, I can't take your money, I've watched that news story the day before. I knew he was going to jump."

The blond replied : "No keep the money, I also watched it the day before. I just didn't think he'd do it again"
Arjun the Indian wife-beater punches his wife every night at 7 PM On the dot.
What's the most annoying thing about an aging hipster? He fucked your mom before it was popular.
The Supervisor goes to a farm where there is a large pig farm. The Supervisor goes to a farm where there is a large pig farm.
There, he asks the owner:
"How do you feed the pigs?"
"I give them leftovers." Says the farmer.
"That's not right." The Supervisor says. "I'm going to apply a fine of $10.000,00  for not feeding the pigs properly." 
After a month the Supervisor returns and asks:
"What are you feeding the pigs?"
"Well, now I'm feeding them corn."
"That's wrong." The Supervisor says. "You will be fined $50.000,00".
   3 months later the Supervisor returns and notice that the farm has only a few pigs.
The Supervisor asks the owner:
"Have you diminuished your breeding?"
"I didn't". Says the farmer.
"So where are the rest of the pigs?"
"They're out there, and those who are here are back from lunch."
"What are the pigs eating?" Asks the Supervisor.
"I do not know!! Every time you come back to my farm I'm fined. So now I give each pig $10,00 everyday, and they eat whatever they want ".
Why do trans-people go invisible when they have kids?  They become trans-parent.
What time is it when you have $1.25? A quarter past four.
Some people dont like meatloaf... But if you listen to his songs, 2 out of 3 aint bad.
What's the worst thing about breaking up with a Japanese girl? You have to drop the bomb twice before she gets the message.
Never trust shrimp They're full of shit
How do you pick up an elephant with one hand? You can't. Elephants don't have hands.
The chicken was acquitted of murder... ... because there was no evidence of fowl-play.
Your family tree must be a cactus. Because everyone on it is a prick.
A wife asks her husband, "what would he do if she died"? Husband: "I would go insane!"

Wife: "Would you remarry?"

Husband: "I don't know. You can't predict what an insane person would do."
#3335 I first heard this one from my brother when I was twelve and it's been a favorite ever since! 
Why will all of the referees check their voicemail immediately after the Super Bowl? So they can hear someone say "no missed calls"
A wise Chinese monk once said, "If the dog barks... it's not cooked well enough."﻿
Say, have you heard the joke about the pizza without the sauce? Well, it goes like- Nevermind, it's too cheesy.
What do you call someone who speaks 3 languages? Trilingual.

What do you call someone who speaks 2 languages?

Bilingual.

What do you call someone who speaks 1 language?

French.
Why do men like bacon? Because they're pigs.
Heard this one at my great aunt's funeral A young boy and his friend are attending mass at the boy's parish. His friend has never been to a church service before. As they pass through the vestibule the young boy dips his hand into the holy water and makes the sign of the cross.

Confused, his friend asks "What's that mean?"

"I'm blessing myself before entering God's house" replied the young boy.

The two children walk down the aisle and stop at the front pew. The young boy genuflects before sitting down.

Again, confused, his friend asks "What's that mean?"

"I'm humbling myself before Christ's Tabernacle" replies the young boy.

Soon the pastor arrives and the service begins. After the opening prayers and the readings the priest removes his watch from his wrist, places it upward facing on the pulpit, and begins his sermon.

The friend asks "What's that mean?"

"Not a damn thing" the young boy replies.
Little Jimmy asked his teacher if he could go to the bathroom. "Yes, but you have to recite the alphabet first."

"But teacher, it's an emergency!"

"Just tell me the alphabet first and you can go.

"A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Q R S T U V W X Y Z."

"Where's the P?"

"It's all over your MOM'S FACE you retarded bitch! Lol owned"
What happened to Cinderella after the ball? She choked. 
What is Mexico's national sport? Cross country 


Why was the Energizer Bunny sent to jail? Domestic battery
Steve jobs would have been a better president than Donald Trump. But its a silly comparison really, its like comparing apples to oranges. 
Did you hear about the blonde who backed into an airplane propeller? Disaster.
What sound does a 747 make when it lands? Boeing! Boeing! Boeing!
As a Christian I can't Believe there are Billy Idol Cover Bands The Bible is very clear that we should not have False Idols 
3 mothers are sitting around having coffee and talking about their children. The brunette mom says, "I was going through my daughters room the other day and found a bottle of vodka, I can't believe my daughter drinks!"

The red head mom says, " that's  nothing, I was going through my daughters room the other day and found a bag of Marijuana, I can't believe my daughter does drugs!"

The blonde mom says, "I got that beat. I was going through my daughters room the other day and found a box of condoms, I can't believe my daughter has a penis!"
A blind man walks into a bar... and a table... and a chair.
What do you get when you take the i out of waiter? A ban from the restaurant 
Think Recursion There are two kinds of people in the world, ones who divide the world into two kinds of people and ones who do not.
The Dancing Cookie There was a truck driver that worked for a cookie company. Each week, he would load up his truck with cookies from the factory and make the three-day-long journey to the buyer. He would unload all the cookies and make the three-day-long drive back to the factory. He'd been working at the company for years, and was quite reputable.

One day, he loaded up his trailer and hit the road. After driving for hours, he stopped at a truck stop and inspected his cargo as he normally would, just to make sure everything's okay. When he opened up the doors, there was a hole in one of the packages! He looked around the trailer and his eyes landed on a cookie, walking around the boxes! The driver couldn't believe it, but grabbed the cookie, stuffed it back in the box and taped it shut. "That should take care of it," he thought. After getting a cup of coffee, he started driving again. 

When he stopped for the night, the driver thought that he better check and make sure that cookie wasn't out of the box again. He opened the doors again, saw the broken box and a cookie doing the Charleston! The driver thought he was going insane, but there it was; a dancing cookie. He brought out the duct tape and sealed the cookie back in the box, then went to bed.

The next morning, the truck driver woke up a the crack of dawn, thinking that last night's events were only a dream. After getting a bagel and coffee from a restaurant, he started up his truck and hit the road, jamming to the radio. Once he was fully awake, he remembered the cookie and realized it wasn't a dream. Slamming on the brakes, he took the nearest off ramp from the highway, swung the trailer doors open. Lo and behold, the cookie box had a new hole in it, and the cookie was leading a one cookie conga line on top! Furious, the driver snatched the cookie up, crammed it into the box, and covered the entire box in tape. Pleased that he wouldn't have to worry about the cookie again, he kept driving until the sun went down.

On the third day, after a peaceful night's sleep, the truck driver started on the last leg of the journey to the buyer. He didn't even check the trailer for the cookie, being sure that it couldn't get through the tape. 

When he finally arrived at his destination, the driver checked in at the office and backed his truck up to the loading dock. As the unloading staff opened the doors, a small brown object fell out of a box. They didn't notice anything until they had unloaded a few boxes; one of the boxes was covered in tape and had a hole in it! Thinking it may have been caused by mice, they called over their supervisor. After taking one look, the supervisor called the driver's company, explained what happened, hung up and spoke two small words to the driver:

"You're fired."

Devastated, the driver didn't know what to do. He grabbed the offending box and stepped back into his eighteen-wheeler and sat there for a minute, in shock. Something caught his eye on the dashboard. It was the cookie, doing the moonwalk. The driver didn't make an effort to put the cookie back into the box, it didn't matter any more.

He drove to the beach, took the box of cookies, and sat at the end of a pier with the cookie next to him, tap dancing. "I hope you're happy," he said to the cookie. "You got me fired from a job I worked at for years, a job I was happy doing. Now what am I supposed to do?" The cookie didn't look at him and kept dancing. The driver became madder and madder. "You think that's funny? How about THIS?!" He hollered as he kicked the cookie box and cookie off the dock into the ocean.

**THE** **END**

Isn't that a crumby ending?
What do you call a deer with no eyes? I have no ideer
A Man Was Tanned Everywhere Except His Penis.... There was a man who really took care of his body. He lifted weights and jogged 6 miles a day. One day, he took a look in the mirror and noticed that he was tan all over except his penis. So, he decided to do something about it. 
He went to the beach, completely undressed and buried himself in the sand, except for his penis, which he left sticking out. 
Two old ladies were strolling along the beach, one using a cane. Upon seeing the penis sticking up over the sand, she began to move it around with her cane, remarking to the other lady, "There's no justice in the world." 
The other lady asked what she meant and she said: "When I was 20, I was curious about it.
When I was 30, I enjoyed it. 
When I was 40, I asked for it.
When I was 50, I paid for it. 
When I was 60, I prayed for it. 
When I was 70, I forgot about it. 
Now, I am 80 and the damn things are growing wild on the beach and I'm too old to squat."
Ever use an expensive toothbrush? It's breath-taking
A boy was born without a body... His mother carried him around when she went out. Ever time she walked to the grocery store they would pass the playground. He saw children laughing and playing and he wanted so badly to be able to join them. Every night he wished for a body to go play with the other children. To his surprise one morning he woke up to find that he could stand, and walk and play, his dream came true! He ran down the stairs and flung the door open and bolted down the road toward the playground. Just as he crossed the road his face beaming, oblivious to the oncoming traffic, a bus tried to swerve and miss him but it was to late. The boy was crushed by the bus from the neck down, only his head remained. 

The moral of the story is that in life it is better to stay ahead.
The past, present, and future walk into a bar. It was tense.
And God said to man, "I will put obediant women on all corners of the world," then laughed as he made the world a ball.
Help me To whoever has my voodoo doll, please scratch between my butt cheeks. I'm in public. Thanks. 
Why does Trump keep marrying immigrants? Because no Americans were willing to take the job.
What do you call a Sasquatch in mud? Dirty Hairy 
How will Tom Brady feel if the Patriots lose? Deflated.
Blue films are the most Positive Movies.... No violence , No conspiracy, No Cheating...  !!
Lots of Love & always a very Happy Ending for all Characters!! 
Lots of religious reference "oh god, oh my god, oh my god"
Good co-operation, Good co-ordination, natural acting, No language problem...And the best part the actor's as well as audience are satisfied. 
A psychiatrists secretary walked into his study... And said, "There's a gentleman in the waiting room asking to see you. Claims he's invisible."

The psychiatrist responded... 

"Tell him I can't see him."
Have a good day When I greeted my boss in the morning, he told me to have a good day.
 
Who am I to argue? So I thanked him and went back home.


How do you kill a clown? Stab it repeatedly
A Very Funny beautiful girl was a college student. Once Very Funny Girl comes late to class.

Teacher: Why are you late?

Very Funny Girl : One boy was following me, sir.

Teacher: So, What?

Very Funny Girl : That boy was walking very slow.
What do you can a pile of cats? A meowtian of pussy.
My wife complained that our sex life was boring I replied with "Well honey, if the same thing every three days works for r/jokes, it should be good enough for you."
What's brown and sticky? A brown stick

**slaps knee**

Wakka wakka wakka!
Guys... I don't think Trump is really our president... He might just be Putin us on!
My wife and I decided not to have children... The kids are taking it pretty hard. 
Frank and Ollie go to the beach wearing Speedos... FRANK: Hey Ollie, you know why we have these new Speedos, right?
OLLIE: No, why? They are tight.
FRANK: To pick up cute girls, they like tight swim shorts on guys like us.
OLLIE: Great! I like cute girls.
FRANK: Here, put this potato in your speedos to pick up the cutest girls. They will go crazy for you when they see that.
OLLIE: Got it, let's split up and meet back here in 30minutes with our cute girls.
(30 minutes later)
OLLIE: Hey Frank, all the girls where pointing and seemed crazy. But they all ran away. I couldn't even talk to them.
FRANK: Ollie, the potato is supposed to go in the front!
A woman walks into a bar and asks for a double entendre So the barman gives her one
I scared the postman today by showing up to the door completely naked i scared the postman today by showing up to the door completely naked. im not sure what scared him more, the fact that i was naked, or that i knew where he lived
To prevent date rape, there's a new drug for men called Niagra Viagra Rises, Niagra falls!
Why do riot police like to get to work early? To beat the crowd.
A bear walks into a bar... ... goes up to the barman and says "I'd like a gin and tonic .............. and a packet of peanuts". The barman says "Sure, but why the big pause?". The bear holds up his hands and says, "These? Hey, I was born with them".
I'm curious what my vegetarian friend will bring to the superbowl party tonight. Hopefully it's an apology.
If I could travel back in time, I would go to the Inquisition. I heard the women had nice racks.
Why do gorillas have such big nostrils? Big fingers!
A man walks into a bar... He sees a sign that reads, "cheese sandwich: $1.50, chicken sandwich: $2.50, hand job: $10." The man beckons to the sexy waitress and says, "are you the one who does the hand jobs?"
"Yes," she purrs, "I am."
"Well wash your freaking hands," the man says, "I want a cheese sandwich!"
I don't watch the news anymore I just lie to my self and cut out the middle man.
I'm ordering a chicken and an egg from Amazon I'll let you know
Who do you call when a popcorn gets murdered? The pop coroner 
Loving beer and wanting abs is hard So I had to cancel my gym membership due to conflict of interests
A farmer went into a local bar... ...and ordered a glass of champagne.
The woman sitting next to him said, 'How about that? I just ordered champagne too!'
'What a coincidence' the farmer said. 'This is a special day for me. I'm celebrating.'
"This is a special day for me too, I am also celebrating," said the woman.
'What a coincidence!' said the farmer. As they clinked glasses headded: 'What are you celebrating?'
'My husband and I have been trying to have a child and today my gynecologist told me that I am pregnant!'
'What a coincidence!' said the man.
'I'm a chicken farmer and all last year my hens were infertile, but
today they are all laying eggs again.'
'That's great!' said the woman, 'How did your chickens become fertile?'
'I used a different cock,' he replied.
The woman smiled, clinked his glass and said 'What a coincidence!'
[NSFW] Yesterday i was caught masturbating in the shower Bet I never get allowed in to Auschwitz again.
Ban pre-shredded cheese. 
Make America grate again! 
A man goes to the pharmacy to buy laxatives for his wife. The man asks the pharmacists where the laxatives are so the pharmacist says "To the right, on the bottom shelf, you'll see a green box that says Dulcolax". The man sees the box and sees a pink box right next to it saying "Woman's laxative". The pink box was three times cheaper so the man takes the box and asks the pharmacist, what about this? This is not for me, it's for my wife. The pharmacist replies, in that case you can take that, it's the same shit.
I saw two names carved in a tree... I do not think its cute. On the contrary, its alarming how many people take a knife on a date.
Did you hear about that new, bad pizza joint? Yay, they're getting critically panned by reviewers.
Conjunctivitis.com That’s a site for sore eyes

- Tim Vine, 2012
Which college football team keeps people awake at night? The long horns
What kind of processors do slow PCs use? Potato Chips!
A man walks into a bar and finds an octopus sitting on a stool... The bartender tells the man "This octopus is really special. You can give it any instrument and it will play it better than any human ever has."

So the guy needs to test this out. Luckily the bar keeps some instruments on hand for just that purpose. The man grabs a guitar and brings it to the octopus. Sure enough, it plays incredibly, the best guitar-playing the man has ever seen.

The man goes and gets a violin and gives it to the octopus. Again, the octopus plays it amazingly, a virtuoso far beyond anything the man has seen before.

The man has to try one more time. He saw something that surely the octopus would be vexed by -  he grabs a set of bagpipes and brings it to the octopus. The octopus finally seems perplexed, just fiddling around with the bagpipes in confusion. Satisfied, the man says "Ha! I knew you wouldn't be able to play it!"

The octopus looks at him and says "Play it? I was gonna fuck it once I got the pajamas off of it." 
Did you know Matthew McConaughey is left handed? Just kidding, he's alright alright alright.
A little boy gets on the bus... A little boy gets on the bus and stops to talk to the driver.
"Did you know if my mother was a duck and my father was a duck I'd be a baby duck"? Says the boy.
"I don't care" says the bus driver, "You're holding up the line".
The boy replies "well did you know if my mother was a bear and my father was a bear then I would be a baby bear"?
Now angry that the kid has made him late the driver responds "oh yea? Well what would you be if your mother was a whore and your father was drug dealer"?
The little boy looks at him and says "If my mother was a whore and my father was drug dealer then that would make me a bus driver"
A farmer wanted to buy a new rooster to breed with his chickens... The farmer's old rooster was getting up there in the years, so he buys a new one.

The old rooster looks at the new rooster and sizes him up. "Look, sonny, I'm willing to hand over the whole henhouse to you, but you gotta prove yourself to be strong and quick. I'm gonna run, and if you can catch me, it's about time for me to retire."

The young rooster thinks it over and agrees to the contest. The old rooster runs fast, but the young rooster runs faster. Just as the young rooster is about to catch up, though -- BANG!

The farmer fired a gun, killing the young rooster. "Damn it, I bought another gay rooster!"
NASA's Space Pen When NASA first started sending up astronauts, they quickly discovered that ballpoint pens would not work in zero gravity. To combat the problem, NASA scientists spent a decade and $12 billion to develop a pen that writes in zero gravity, upside down, underwater, on almost any surface including glass and at temperatures ranging from below freezing to 300 degrees Celsius. The Russians used a pencil. 
A Woman Gets On The Bus With Her Baby The bus driver says: "That's the ugliest baby that I've ever seen." The woman goes to the rear of the bus and sits down, fuming. She says to a man next to her, "That driver just insulted me!" The man says, "You go right up there and tell him off! Go ahead, I'll hold your monkey for you." 
Why does Michael J. Fox make the best milkshakes? Because he uses the finest ingredients. 
Russian dictators are the best. They’re the crème de la Kremlin!
Hothead Pat, upset by how the Super Bowl is going, starts destroying things. Police get on the megaphone trying to evacuate the area: "Go, Pat riots!"
What is a snowflake's school grade based on? Class precipitation.
What kind of dessert makes women gain the most weight? Wedding Cake.
I just completed a puzzle in 6 months despite it saying 4 - 6 years on the box.
What did the zeros say after the election? He will not divide us
"A boy jumped through the window". What is the subject? English literature 
What's the best part of a lobster pizza? The **crust**acean.
I was in a cab today and the cab driver said, "I love my job, I'm my own boss. Nobody tells me what to do..." Then I said, "turn Left".
Start typing on a laptop im not used to 4vjenp/ptth
Words of wisdom I'd rather kill myself than to commit suicide.
A woman was trying to breastfeed her son in a bus The kid throws a tantrum and refuses to suck on his mother's breast. So in a fit, the mother tells her son, "If you don't want this milk, I'm gonna give this to the gentleman beside us."

An hour later, the kid still refused to breastfeed. So she tells her son again, "If you won't breastfeed, I'm really gonna give this to this man beside us!"

Then the guy beside them suddenly interrupted, "Please make up your mind now. My stop was 30 minutes ago."
I didn't know the Disneyland had moved to the white house ... Apparently the president is Donald and the vice is Mickey.
At what time was Justin Trudeau eaten by a monster? Ate P.M.
We need to stop animal testing our products "But shampoo and makeup companies do it"

"We make dildos"
What do you call it when you are studying bacteria and someone steals your sample? Cultural appropriation. 
Scientific opinions differ... on whether climate change deniers have dog or rat shit for brains.
While I was on the bus, the person standing next to me played the national anthem While I was sitting on the bus, the person standing next to me played the national anthem, 

I stood up and he took my seat.
Long ago, there was a cathedral... The old bell ringer had passed away and the bishop set out a sign announcing that the position was now open for new applicants.  A few weeks go by without  any bites, but one day a man comes in.  The man had a hunched back and no arms, so the bishop was leary of his ability to perform the job, but the Lord teaches love and acceptance of all.  He says to the man, "if you can climb into the tower and ring the bell, the position is yours."  

Elated, the armless man runs up the tower stairs, bypassing the rope that one would normally use, but that he was unable to manipulate.  At the top of the stairs, there was ladder to get into the belfry.  Without hesitation, he climbs the ladder using his teeth, and beams as he looks upon the church's bell.  He backs into the corner of the belfry, takes a deep breath, and runs at the bell full speed.  He slams into the bell, it swings and tolls beautifully.   The bishop kept his word and awarded the man the job.

Weeks go by, and all seems right with the world.  The armless man enjoys his new life, but sometimes, he gets a little dizzy tolling the higher hours.  One day, while performing his duty to mark noon, he misses the bell altogether and sails out the far side of the tower.  He falls to his death, and a crowd gathers around the body.  In the general murmur, a voice calls out, "does anyone know this man?"  Another replies...

"No, but his face sure rings a bell!"

With a heavy heart, the bishop places out the sign once more, advertising the open position.  Again, weeks pass without a single taker, until another man arrives.  His resemblance to the previous man is uncanny.  A hunched back, no arms, and nearly identical in appearance.  The bishop is dubious, fearful of a repeat of the recent tragedy, but the man falls to his knees, weeping and pleading, and against his better judgement, the bishop makes him the same offer.  The hunchback climbs into the belfry, backs into the corner, runs and tolls the bell, claiming the job.

To ensure the new ringer's safety, the bishop commissions the installation of bars across the open sides of the tower, and life continues on.  Over the next few years, the hunchback enjoys his life within the cathedral.   He is well cared for, and happy to perform his duty, though the midday ringings do tend to take their toll, and like his predecessor, he misses once in a while, but the bars give him security.  Unfortunately, the bars are not maintained, they rust, and at last, they give.  The armless man tumbles out of the tower and falls to his death.  Once more, a crowd gathers, and again, someone calls out, "does anyone know this man?"  And a voice replies...

"No, but he sure is a dead ringer for his brother!"
the flat earth society ... ... has members all around the globe
I've tried to stop swearing but i cunt.
What do you call it when a girl wants sex and lies about being on her period Getting caught red handed 
US Representatives are like the dislike button on Youtube comments They are supposed to be there to represent your dissent and anger, but never actually do.
I was sitting in a diner waiting order, when I hear, "Does anyone know CPR?"

I said, "I know the entire alphabet!"

We all laughed and laughed...except one guy.
On his 70th birthday, an old man received a coupon from his wife... The coupon paid for a visit to a medicine man living on a nearby reservation who was rumored to have a wonderful cure for erectile dysfunction.  
After being persuaded to go, he drove to the reservation, handed his ticket to the medicine man and wondered what he was in for.  
The old man handed a potion to him, and with a grip on his shoulder, warned, "This is a powerful medicine. You take only a teaspoon and then say '1-2-3'." When you do, you will become more manly than you have ever been in your life and you can perform as long as you want."  
The man was encouraged. As he walked away, he turned and asked, "How do I stop the medicine from working?"  
"Your partner must say '1-2-3-4,'" the medicine man responded, "but when she does, the medicine will not work again until the next full moon."  
The man was very eager to see if it worked so he went home, showered, shaved, took a spoonful of the medicine and then invited his wife to join him in the bedroom. When she came in, he quickly took off his clothes and said, "1-2-3!" Immediately, he was the manliest of men. His wife was excited and began throwing off her clothes as she asked "What was the 1-2-3 for?"  
And that, boys and girls, is why we should never end our sentences with a preposition, because we could end up with a dangling participle.
You know the old saying "Liquor before beer, in the clear; beer before liquor never sicker" As it turns out liquor before liquor before liquor is worse
Why are Samoan's offended by the Samoa Girl Scout Cookie? I mean it's not like white people care about crackers being called crackers.
I love to watch my guests throw up. So I always put the dartboard on the ceiling.   
Superbowl That's it, that is the joke.
Did you hear the joke about Oxygen and Potassium? It was OK
I love cats They taste ***just*** like chicken!
I walked in to a supermarket today and noticed an attractive woman waving at me... She said hello and I was rather taken aback because I couldn't place where I knew  her from.

So I asked, "Do you know me?"

To which she replied, "I think you’re the father of one of my kids."

Now. my mind traveled back to the only time I have ever been unfaithful to my wife and I said, "My God, are you the stripper from my bachelor party that I made love to on the pool table with all my buddies watching while your partner whipped my butt with wet celery?"

She looks into my eyes and said  calmly, "No, I’m your son’s teacher."
What does the oxygen say to the magma? I LAVA you
What do you get if you cross an insomniac with an atheist and a dyslexic? Someone who stays up all night, wondering if there is a file after death.
My boss asked me who is the stupid one, me or him? I told him everyone knows he doesn't hire stupid people.
Grammar Nazis no longer exist Their called the Alt-Write now
If humans were potatoes what would Donald Trump be called? A dick tater 
Donald Trump might be the greatest salesman of all time. He sold bullshit to over 60 million people... and they bought it. 
What does the word "gay" mean? Asked a boy to his father, to which he replied, "It means happy, son".

"Are you happy the Dad?" Asked the boy

"No son, I have a wife"
Escaping from the men's section of the insane asylum, the retard made his way into the women's block There he noticed a woman with practically no clothes. He took her in his arms.

Nine months later, he escaped again and returned to her room. Only this time she had a little moron. 

A man driving to the store finds no place to park... He sees an empty parking spot and eagerly drives his car into the slot, paying no attention to the "Customer Only" sign. When he comes back, his car has disappeared. He storms into the bank, where he demands to know where his car went. The banker looks straight into his eyes and whispers "I towed you so."
I love the way the world rotates It really makes my day.
My wife must have shit herself when i was born! Because she was only twelve days old
A Comanche scout was leading the US Army through the plains The army unit was traveling through hostile territory and needed this Comanche scout that knew the land better than anyone in the area, had the reputation to track anything for miles, and could tell what was headed towards them just from the signs of nature. The scout raised his right hand and halted the expedition suddenly. All eyes were on him as he walked quietly up ahead of the group and went to his knees and slowly placed his ear directly on the ground.  He jumped back and turned towards the commander. 
"Buffalo come" said the Comanche scout in broken English.
"By Lincoln's ghost! How could you tell first there was something coming and second that it's Buffalo?!" Said the amazed Commander. 
The Comanche scout raised his hand to his cheek and said "Face Sticky."
How many Aggies does it take to build a bonfire? It's like dividing by zero.  It can't be done
A mother found her son scooping ice cream in the kitchen and was mad. Mom : "Dinner is going to be ready in an hour, put that ice cream away and go play."
  
Son : "But mom, there's no one to play with."
  
Mom : "I'll play with you, what do you wanna play?"
  
Son : "Lets play mommy and daddy, you go upstairs and lay down on the bed."
  
The mom said ok and went upstairs. The son put on his dad's fishing hat and lit up one of his dad's cigarettes. He went upstairs and opened the door.
  
Mom : "Now what do I do?"
  
Son : "Get your ass out of bed, you whore, and fix that kid some fucking ice cream."
Would you remarry if I die? A husband and wife are sitting quietly in bed reading when the wife looks over at him and asks the question....

WIFE: "What would you do if I died? Would you get married again?"

HUSBAND: "Definitely not!"

WIFE: "Why not? Don't you like being married?"

HUSBAND: "Of course I do.."

WIFE: "Then why wouldn't you remarry? "

HUSBAND: "Okay, okay, I'd get married again."

WIFE: "You would?" (with a hurt look)

HUSBAND: (makes audible groan)

WIFE: "Would you live in our house?"

HUSBAND: "Sure, it's a great house."

WIFE: "Would you sleep with her in our bed?"

HUSBAND: "Where else would we sleep?"

WIFE: "Would you let her drive my car?"

HUSBAND: "Probably, it is almost new."

WIFE: "Would you replace my pictures with hers?"

HUSBAND: "That would seem like the proper thing to do."

WIFE: "Would you give her my jewellery?"

HUSBAND: "No, I'm sure she'd want her own."

WIFE: "Would you take her golfing with you?

HUSBAND: "Yes, those are always good times."

WIFE: "Would she use my clubs?

HUSBAND: "No, she's left-handed."

WIFE: -- silence --

HUSBAND: "Shit."

An old couple is sitting in church The wife turns to the husband and says, "I just let out a silent fart. What should I do."

"Put new batteries in your hearing aids."
*A man is trying to prove his innocence in court* Defendant: "Please your honour, I don't have a single bad bone in my body"

Prosecutor: "Well according to your medical exam it appears you have osteoporosis"

Judge: "Guilty"
A man wakes up in hospital and exclaims, "Doctor! I... I can't feel my legs"! Doctor:  "Right, that's because we had to amputate your arms".
A man walks into a bar... He sits down to have a pint and notices lumps of meat hanging above the bar.

He asks the barman, "What's with the meat hanging here?"

The barman explains... "Well if you can jump up and hit the meat, you get a free drink, but if you miss, you have to buy everyone a round. What do you say?"

The man say, "Hmm no, the steaks are too high."
I was walking home late at night along a dark street. There was a young woman walking a few steps in front of me. She crossed over to the other side of the road; I crossed over too.

She quickened her pace a little; I quickened my pace too.

She broke into a run; I broke into a run too.

She panicked and began to scream and run hell-for-leather; I panicked and began to scream and run hell-for-leather too.

Whatever it was, I was damned if it was going to catch me first.

P.S. It's an old one, but I doubt the original used semi-colons, so give me that.
My wife said that I don't listen... ...or it was something like that.
Why did the console gamer die in the art gallary? There was too many frames.
So i was at this bar And the bar tender yelled "Does anyone know CPR!?" I yelled back "Yeah I do, and I know the rest of the alphabet too!" Everybody in the bar laughed....Except one guy.
A cowboy dies and goes to hell, Satan say's he can choose his punishment, However there is one rule, once you pass on a pushiment, you cannot go back, you must move onto the next one, so the cowboy agree's and satan takes him to the first room, it is a bunch of men standing on their heads, the cowboy takes a look and says "naw ill pass on this one".     so they go to the next one, and its a bunch of people again standing on their heads however this time on hard concerete. once again the cowboy passes, in the third room, he sees a bunch of people standing knee deep in cow shit, smoking and drinking, the cowboy takes a look and says "well hell i lived most of my live smoking and drinking in cow shit, ill take this one.

So the cowboy stands around for about a half hour smoking and drinking when satan walks back into the room and says 

"all right boys breaks over **EVERYBODY** back on your heads!" 



As a black man why don't I like cops? Beats me
Did you hear about the foreskin that accidentally walked into the Shul? [removed]
I wish I got laid as much... ... as I get screwed
What did the General say to the Sultan when they lost the battle? "Sir, we're Otto-men!"
A man saw a post on Facebook. The post said- 
hamburger + fries = £5
fries + slushie= £7
slushie + chicken nuggets = £11
How much does a slushie, chicken nuggets, fries and  a hamburger cost?
The man was incredibly stupid so he dawned on the question for hours and hours. While he was thinking, the answer just dawned on him. He scrolled down to the comment section and typed in one word.
"Diabetes"
How do you know if you have one of the rare $1million pennies in circulation? You don't.
A woman posts an ad in the news paper that looks like this... 

'Looking for man with these qualifications; won't beat me up; or run away from me and is great in bed.'

She got lots of phone calls replying to her ad but met someone perfect at her door one day. The man she met said, "Hi, I'm Bob. I have no arms so I won't beat you up and no legs so I won't run away."

So the lady says, "What makes you think you are great in bed?"

Bob replies, "I rang the door bell didn't I?"


I started teaching Maths to midgets in my area. I'm making little things count.
Three words to ruin a man's ego...? Is it in?
Why did I get divorced? Well, last week was my birthday. My wife didn't wish me a happy birthday. My parents forgot and so did my kids. I went to work and even my colleagues didn't wish me a happy birthday. As I entered my office, my secretary said, "Happy birthday, boss!" I felt so special. She asked me out for lunch. After lunch, she invited me to her apartment. We went there and she said, "Do you mind if I go into the bedroom for a minute?" "Okay," I said. She came out 5 minutes later with a birthday cake, my wife, my parents, my kids, my friends, & my colleagues all yelling, "SURPRISE!!!" while I was waiting on the sofa... naked.
I have just watched a documentary on marijuana. I think all documentaries should be watched this way.
Why can't noses be 12 unches long? Because then it'd be a foot!
Was in town last night... I somehow managed to pull this absolute stunner of a lassie. Long story short, turns out she was a lady boy.
But I mean, she looked like a woman, spoke like a woman, kissed like a woman...

It was only when she drove us back to her place and managed to reverse the car perfectly into the garage that I stopped and thought "wait, hang on a minute!"
My girlfriend wanted me to treat her like a princess. So I gave her to a gorilla for him to throw barrels at me.  
If I had a dollar for every time someone over 40 told me my generation sucks... I'd have enough money to buy the rights for this joke.
A man stuck in a traffic jam some guy came and knocked on his windows and said "Donald Trump has been kidnapped, the kidnappers ask for 1 billion dollars or they will burn him with gasoline , we're asking for donation "
So the man in the car asked and on average how much does a person donate?
so the guy replies "between one gallon and two gallons "
It's Albert Einstein, not mine Few things are Infinite,
The Universe, Human stupidity and the amount of times you have to tell your Mother you can't pause an online Game.
What does a man with no balls and a small penis have in common with a joke with a good punchline...

They both make you laugh and you don't see them coming.
Sisters of Mercy House of Prostitution A man was driving along one evening and saw a sign that said, "Sisters of Mercy House of Prostitution, 10 miles."  Thinking is was a little weird, he then comes to another sign, "Sisters of Mercy House of Prostitution, 5 miles."  So when he gets to the place, out of curiosity, he decides to check it out.  He walks up to the door and a nun answers.  He tells her about the signs he saw and she says, "Oh yes, come on in."  Once inside, she instructs him to take the door to the right, go down the hall to the left and Sister Agnes will greet you.  So he does as instructed, going through the door to the right and down the hall to the left and there's Sister Agnes, who says, "Yes, that will be $50 please and just take this door to the right."  He pays his money and takes the door to the right, where he finds himself back out in the parking lot with a big sign that says, "Thank you, you've just been screwed by the Sisters of Mercy."
It takes many nails to build a crib... But only one to fill it
After Noah led the animals onto the ark, it started to rain After Noah led the animals onto the ark, two by two, it started to rain for 40 days and 40 nights. After the 15th day, with all the animals cooped up together with no designated toilet area, the ark began to smell. So Noah, being a wise old Noah, decided to set up a designated shitting area at the bow of the ark. He then called the animals in for a meeting. He proceeded to tell them about the newly designated shitting area. After the 20th day there was so much shit gathered at the bow that the ark began to tilt, leaving the stern raised making it near impossible to play pool. So, being a wise old Noah, he once again had a plan. With the help of the big animals such as the elephants and rhino's he rolled up all the shit into one huge ball and threw it overboard into the ocean.... 

325,000 years later Christopher Columbus discovered it.
What do you call a gay couple in their 80? Slo-mo sexuals.
One day, Canada will take over the world. Then we'll all be sorry.
What is Donald Trump's most anticipated movie of the year? The Great Wall. 
A bird is shivering on the fence of a barnhouse on a cold evening... ...A dog passes by, on seeing the bird grabbed it carefully with its teeth and places it in a heap of freshly laid cow dung on the floor of the barn an plodded off. The bird who was already cold became quite pissed at the dog, it tried to move but the dung was too thick. It then felt the warmth of the dung, far warmer that it's former place and began to enjoy the warmth and felt quite happy and began to sing.

Now a hawk that had also decided to take shelter in the barn wakes up to the sound of the bird singing. It sees the bird and swoops down and grabs it before washing it in a tub of water to clean off the bits of dung on it. The bird was feeling thankful for being pulled out of the cooling dung until the hawk just ate it.

Now this story has two morals;

1. Who ever puts you in trouble(shit) isn't necessarily a bad person nor is the one who pulls you out of the trouble a good person.

2. And the second moral is; when you are in trouble, I mean in DEEP shit, don't fucking sing.
My dad has suggested that I register to be an organ donor.... I guess he is a man after my own heart.
I got arrested for killing a black man. They charged me with impersonating a police officer.
What is Justin Timberlake's Favorite vacation spot in the Ukraine? Crimea River
Britain is the best place for foodies. You loose pounds everytime you eat
I sat next to a smoking-hot thai woman on an aeroplane once... I thought to myself.... *"please don't get an erection, please don't get an erection...."*


And then she did. 
Girl, you're just like breathing... All I ever think about
I dont usually wear jeans but... i hate jeans with a passion but on this particular night that i had a date all my khakis were dirty, so i had no choice but to slip into a pair of levis i had hanging in the closet. later on that night the subject of hereditary body parts came up between me and the lady, she told me she gets her enormous tits from her mother, and i told her yeah well i have huge dick.... its in the JEANS. 
What do fish like to smoke? Seaweed
Two fish are swimming Two fish are swimming,
One hits a wall and says dam. 
My ex-girlfriend still loves it when I eat her out of house and home. Is this the usual breakup routine? 
What's Trump's favorite math operation? Division. 
Why is Donald Trump single? Because he doesn't want to be with some Juan.
Talk is cheap. But AM radio still can't turn a profit.  
I saw two kids fighting on the play ground. As the only adult there I had to step in.  They never had a chance.
What did Barrack say when he was all alone? [1/2 OC] Here I am Obama self...
Like a crab in Michelle.
What did the young casserole say to his mother when she called him down for dinner? "I can't Ma, I'm stroganoff!"
Are you a dime? Because no one fucking wants you.
What do you call a fashionable Russian? Spetsnazzy.
Nerdy pickup line Hey baby, are you a compressed file format, because rar.

^^^^^now ^^^^^where ^^^^^did ^^^^^I ^^^^^put ^^^^^the ^^^^^bleach...
Three words I can't stand *three words, I can't stand
Girlfriend: Would you dump me for someone more like a trophy wife? Me: Honey, I already have someone like that!

Girlfriend: Aww, you're too sweet!

Me: Yeah, you should meet her!
How do you get a condom on an elephant? Take the 'Y' out of 'easy' and the 'F' out of 'Way' ....
If a feminist makes herself a sandwich.. Is she oppressing herself?

Bring it on.
A woman is cleaning her daughters room when she stumbles upon her diary. She sees an entry that reads: "I lost my virginitty today" The woman starts crying.

"How can this happen? I've given her everything. Why did she do this to me? She can't be serious about this. She's in 9th grade for gods sake. How does she not know how to spell virginity?"

'Waiter,' said the customer, 'there's a hair in this honey.' 'Ah', replied the waiter, 'it must be from the comb.' 
Ever since I've installed Adblocker... for some reason all the local singles lost interest in me.
Ever wonder why Jewish girls are so hot? its because the nazis put them in ovens.
My wife came home pissed "I can't believe what the school board is trying to do! I've worked hard to get ahead for 20 years now and they never cease to amaze me how petty they can be!"

I asked what was the matter and did they not give her the promotion to run the school.

"Yes, I got the promotion. The raise, the parking spot closest to the door. Even an extra week vacation."

I'm thinking this sounds great. More money is always good. And an extra week off makes vacation planning so much easier.

"So, it sounds like it's everything you wanted. You're now head of the school, something you've wanted for a long time."

"It's NOT everything. I don't get the title I wanted. They couldn't let me have it. They just had to twist the knife. My title is Senior Administrator." she hissed.

"Well, that does seem a bit strange. But really, you know what you are. So what does it matter?"

"It's the Principal of the matter!"

What's it called when an entire store is sick? A staph (staff) infection.
Z used to be at the front of the alphabet But as we all know, a threw z. 
Boss: Take this broom and go sweep the hallways! Employee:  But I'm a college graduate!
Boss: Great!  Then I should only have to explain this just once.
I know that the placebos is supposed to help with testing pills and medicines if they actually work... But who's smart-ass idea was it to try it with Birth Control!?!?
4 years old: what do you call a cow that does not moo? 5 years old: it is called no moo cow.
New Yorkers; don't go on flight 225B tomorrow *sent from a Galaxy Note 7*
"Hello, is this the anonymous FBI tip line?" "Yes, Dave."
They say that the best thing to do is something that excites you and scares you at the same time. Time to go fuck a blender. 
What do you do if a blonde throws a pin at you? Run like hell, she's holding a hand grenade.
What do you call a skinny tree? The Real Slim Shady
What does the NFL, NBA, and the Catholic Church have in common? They all have a cult following 
A guy walked up to me and said... "I'm a teepee, I'm a wigwam, I'm a teepee, I'm a wigwam!" and I said "Relax man, you're two tents!"
After my wife gave birth I asked my doctor when we could have sex He told me as soon as he'd washed his hands
You should be as excited about church as about the Superbowl. So when your pastor makes a point this Sunday, dump gatorade all over his head. 
100,000 blondes meet in a football stadium for a "Blondes Are Not Stupid" Convention. The leader says, "We are all here today to prove to the world that blondes are not stupid. Can I have a volunteer?"  
  
A blonde gingerly works her way through the crowd and steps up to the stage.  
  
The leader asks her, "What is 15 plus 15?"  
  
After 15 or 20 seconds she says, "Eighteen!"  
  
Obviously everyone is a little disappointed. Then 80,000 blondes start cheering, "Give her another chance! Give her another chance!"  
  
The leader says, "Well since we've gone to the trouble of getting 80,000 of you in one place and we have the world- wide press and global broadcast media here, gee, uh, I guess we can give her another chance."  
  
So he asks, "What is 5 plus 5?"  
  
After nearly 30 seconds she eventually says, "Ninety?"  
  
The leader is quite perplexed, looks down and just lets out a dejected sigh -- everyone is disheartened - the blonde starts crying and the 80,000 girls begin to yell and wave their hands shouting, "GIVE HER ANOTHER CHANCE! GIVE HER ANOTHER CHANCE!"  
  
The leader, unsure whether or not he is doing more harm than damage, eventually says, "Ok! Ok! Just one more chance -- What is 2 plus 2?"  
  
The girl closes her eyes, and after a whole minute eventually says, "Four?"  
  
Throughout the stadium pandemonium breaks out as all 80,000 girls jump to their feet, wave their arms, stomp their feet and scream... "Give her another chance! Give her another chance!"  
Why can't dinosaurs clap their hands? Because they are dead.
I can never calculate the derivative of a curve. Every time I try, I go off on a tangent.
What do you call a dildo you can smoke weed out of? A bong dong.
Difference between Tiger Woods and Princess Diana Tiger Woods has a better driver
What has Donald Trump in common with Pink Floyd? The Wall.
Two surfer dudes are sitting in church One turns to the other and says, "DUDE! Did you know God has a name?"

"Dude, NO WAY!!!"

"Yahweh!"
I was diagnosed with Postpartum Depression.. Being sad since I was born.
What is brown and sticky? Shit
The only difference between my dick and a tiny action figure Is that my dick comes without any warning. 
I have a feeling Gordon Ramsay likes to wear condoms when he has sex Because he doesn't like it raw.
A college teacher noticed that his exchange student, Dave, suddenly had started attracting a lot of female attention. So, one day he asked Dave about his secret. Dave replied: "Well, before sex I simply whip out my willy and smack it against the bedside table, like a hammer. It numbs it up and makes me last longer".  
Later that day, the college teacher gets home to his wife and finds her in the shower - a welcome opportunity for sex. So, he quickly undresses and starts banging his dick against the dresser, just before hearing his wife calling from the shower:  
"Is that you, Dave?".
Ellen should give away more stuff Then rename her show Ellen the Generous.
Donald, Melania, and Ivanka are at the game They show up on the kiss cam, so Donald and Ivanka kiss
What do you get if your pour hot water down a rabbit hole? Hot-Cross bunnies! 😂
My wife was writing a VD poem My wife was diligently writing something this morning. I asked her what she was writing? She relied that she was composing my Valentines Day poem. I was kinda chocked up then, she asked, "What rhymes with SCUM-BAG?"
Me: Hey dad, tell me a joke! Dad: Pussy. 
Me: I don't get it.
Dad: I know.
Shakira Law What's the difference between Trump and "Shakira Law?"

Hips don't lie.
What did the Princess do when she got to the ball? *Makes choking noise*
What do you call a pile of kittens? A meowntain. 
Deep within a forest, a little turtle began to climb a tree... After hours of effort he reached the top, jumped into the air waving his front legs and crashed to the ground.

 After recovering, he slowly climbed the tree again, jumped, and fell to the ground.

The turtle tried again and again while a couple of birds sitting on a branch watched his sad efforts. 

Finally, the female bird turned to her mate and chirped,

“Dear, I think it’s time to tell him he’s adopted.”
Why did the dumb cat slip and fall from the roof? Because μ = 0
How do you think the unthinkable? With an ithburg.
A pirate walks into a bar with a steering wheel in his pants. When the bartender points it out, the pirate replies "Arrrgh, it's been driving me nuts all day."
Guess who retweeted me? Your mom.
My mom made chicken soup with rice in it... I told her, "I don't want chicken soup with Ricin!"
My friend says he has the body of a Greek god... I had to explain to him that Buddha wasn't Greek.
OMG!! I used to be SOOOOOOO popular with the local ladies!!! THen I got ad-blocker
How do you get kicked out of the Boy-scouts? Eating a brownie.
Bill Gates Went To A Restaurant And Paid A $2 Tip, The Waiter Remarked: "Your son gave $100, but you're only giving $2?" Bill Gates: "He's the son of a billionaire, I'm the son of a farmer."
What do they call a dildo in Ireland? A Shamcock!
Poor old fool “Poor Old fool,” thought the well-dressed gentleman as he watched an old man fish in a puddle outside a pub. So he invited the old man inside for a drink. As they sipped their whiskeys, the gentleman thought he’d humor the old man and asked, “So how many have you caught today?”

The old man replied, “You’re the eighth.”
I named my new art Peach It looks pretty, but is completely useless.
I became a proud dad today. My son is four, but he acted like a whiny bitch for the first three years. 
Did you hear about the play with all the frogs? It was ribbitting.
What Gun Company Was Created By Cats Mauser. I'm sorry
I asked my friend why his bike was so fast He said it was made in Kenya

I'm sorry I know this makes no sense whatsoever just click the downvote and be done with it
My wife told me to go and get some pills that help with an erection... You should've seen her face when I tossed her some diet pills. 

I didn't get the question on the exam wrong... I just put down an alternative answer.
I wrote several books about poltergeists. They're flying off the shelves. 
What rhymes with orange. No it doesn't. 
Nobody believes that I can name the Canadian Prime Minister. It's Trudeau.
My friend gave me his epi-pen as he was dying But I can't get it to sign my name to save my life either 
What's an engineer's best form of birth control? His personality. 
What's the difference between Taylor Swift and a stale Pepsi? The stale Pepsi won't write a song about me after I dump it. 
Two Jewish Men are out for a stroll... 2 Jewish men - Abraham and Jacob - are out for a walk and notice a Catholic church with a sign "We pay $100 when you convert to Catholicism!"  
  
Abraham says: "I'm going to see what being Catholic is all about". He goes inside the church for 20 minutes, and when he returns, Jacob is waiting for him.  
  
"Have you converted?" asks Jacob  
  
"Yes, I am now Catholic" says Abraham  
  
"And did they pay you the $100?"   
  
Abraham replies "What is it with you people and your money?"
Alzheimer's isn't bad at all You get to meet new people every day! :D
I made a political joke up just now... Given the current temperature of the political climate....

Do you think we can all finally agree on climate change?
What is Michael Jackson's favorite musical key? F minor.
If I had a dollar... for everyone who thought I was unattractive, they would eventually find me attractive.
My brother just messaged me "I love my girlfriend <3". I always knew he liked them young, but that is fucking ridiculous. 
What do you call a chicken staring at a lettuce? Chicken Caesar salad! 
Why do squirrels swim on their backs? To keep their nuts dry. 
I've already got a car, but I want to have a DeLorean as well. I would drive my first car every day, but only drive the DeLorean from time to time.
Did you hear about the deaf women getting run over by a train? Neither did she
I noticed my waitress had a black eye So I ordered very slowly because obviously she doesn't listen
My dog used to chase people on a bike a lot. It got so bad I had to take his bike away
The chance an American will be killed by a foreign-born refugee is 1 in 3.64 billion. Trump supporter : So you're telling me there is still a chance!
I asked my dentist if I can have some of his laughing gas. He said: "sure, knock yourself out."
What's brown and has four wheels? A turd. I was just shitting you about the wheels.
I am all for animal testing. As long as they are animal products. I don't want my dogs raincoat to be fitted for a human.
We need to revolt against the... outlets. They have all the power!
How does Link from Legend of Zelda always die? Heart complications.
Hey girl, do you live in a corn field? Because I'm stalking you.
Barbara Walters did a story on gender roles in Kabul, Afghanistan, several years before the Afghan conflict... She noted that women customarily walked five paces behind their husbands.

She recently returned to Kabul and observed that women still walked behind their husbands, despite the overthrow of the oppressive Taliban regime and women seemed happy to maintain the old custom.

Ms. Walters approached one of the Afghani women and asked, "Why do you still abide by an old custom, that you once tried so desperately to change?"

The woman looked Ms. Walters straight in the eyes, and without hesitation said, "Land mines."
So my friends younger brother tells me... Him: Do you know what a gun that would shoot pubes sound like?

Me: wtf pubes?... I don't know...

Him: Pew...  Pew Pew

Kids these days. 
My English teacher said that nothing rhymes with orange. There was a young man who had nothing,

Until one day he happened upon an orange.

That rhymes?
I Like My Women Like My fish Battered 
My Mom made chicken soup with celery, chicken, carrots, and rice in it. I told her, "I don't want soup with Ricin!"
Yo momma so basic... ...she got a pH of 15.
Dreamed I died in an orange sea Was just a FANTA sea 
I would like to be poor one day. Because being poor everyday it's hard...
Redditors are like pornstars... They're better when they're not old, but not too young.
Switzerland is a great country, with amazing views and nice people And their flag is also great, which is a huge plus.
"I will argue with you about anything. Anything at all." "No you won't."

"Yeah I will"
What do you pay a British saxophonist? A tenner.
What do hillbillies and yeast have in common? They're both in bred
A priest, a rabbi and a minister are on an airplane with an interfaith youth group The plane starts to go down, and they find there are only three parachutes.


"We'll take them and jump," says the minister.
"But the children," cries the rabbi, "we have to save the children!"


The minister snaps, "fuck the children!"


The priest glances back at the terrified kids, thinks a moment, and asks, 

"Do we have time?"
And the bartender said... "We don't serve time travellers".
A time traveller walked into the bar.


Saw this in a comment can't find it now, thought I share here.
A Mexican walked into a bar. He was renowned for being a bad drunk, but at the same time, he couldn't help getting tipsy once in a while.

He had five shots, and was already losing it. A woman came and sat beside him before he pushed her off the stool and stabbed her right in the chest because 'this senore is smelling of ginger'. He soon realised what he did, and walked out of the shop. Everybody else in the bar was too scared for their lives to call the police. 

When he got home, a little less drunk, his wife immediately asked him upon looking at his bloody shirt, 

'Again, Jose? I thought we agreed on no more strong alcohols.'

'I'm so sorry, Julia,' he replied. 'I had tequila.'
What's the difference between China and Oceania? One spies on its citizens, uses torture, spreads false propaganda, and won't stop fighting with its neighbors. The other is something Orwell put in a book
A crossfitter, a vegan, and a trump supporter walk into a bar I only know because they told everyone who was there.
We should switch to the hexadecimal number system already. And I have a good reasons why.
Why are there no teams named after a dog in the NFL? They would get beaten by Michael Vick
Knock knock jokes. Don't upvote, I just need a good punchline quick. Please help. 
[Request] Meta-joke/anti-joke through explanation I understand this might be the wrong sub to ask this, but I figured /r/jokes would be able to help me.

I'm looking for a specific type of joke or style of comedy that focuses on explaining the joke in a removed and almost satirical manner. The original joke doesn't even have to be that funny, the focus is the emotionless explanation of it afterward (i.e. why it should be funny from a societal standpoint, how it uses different societal tropes, breaking it down from a psychological perspective, etc.). I feel like it is more common among students or professors commenting on the analytical nature of academia.

If someone could point me in the right direction that would be much appreciated!
How many Germans does it take to change a light bulb? **One**

Germans are efficient & have no humor.
Daughters vibrator A mother was walking down the hall when she heard a humming sound coming from her daughter's bedroom. 
When she opened the door she found her daughter naked on the bed with a vibrator. 

What are you doing?" she exclaimed. 

The daughter replied, "I'm 35 and still living at home with my parents and this is the closest I'll ever get to a husband."

Later that week the father was in the kitchen and heard a humming sound coming from the basement. 
When he went downstairs, he found his daughter naked on the sofa with her vibrator. 

"What are you doing?" he exclaimed.

The daughter replied, "I'm 35 and still living at home with my parents and this is the closest I'll ever get to a husband."

A couple of days later the mother heard the humming sound again, this time in the living room. 
In there, she found her husband watching the Super Bowl on television with the vibrator buzzing away beside him.

"What are you doing?" she exclaimed. 

He replied............"Watching the game with my son-in-law."
What do you call an honest capitalist? A small time robber
I feel like a man trapped in a horse's body. It sucks being a centaur. 
I saw two women in a passionate conversation. "How on earth did *he* get between *them*?" I overheard one of them say.

I said, "I guess the 't' and 'm' made room."
Did you know that the mascot of scientology is a horse? Because it's a colt.
A prison decides to renovate its showers An ageing prison facility is constantly beset by long queues for the shower area, which the managers decide to do something about because having all the prisoners together in one area outside of their cells might get nasty. So they look into the problem, and realise that, although the showers themselves are fast enough, the prisoners actually spend a suspiciously long amount of time drying themselves - causing another possible security threat. The managers then hit on the idea of installing a sort of drying cubicle next to the shower, where each prisoner would enter, be assailed by strong blasts of air from all directions, and be fully dry within half a minute, thus leaving them with no excuse to loiter in the shower.

So they install these drying boxes for the prisoners, and at first they seem to be a great success. However, although the machines worked, they were so powerful that they caused a lot of noise, even from outside of the boxes, and - this is important - the noise could be heard in the managers' offices. So the managers decided to find another solution, and remove the drying machines, because they couldn't do any work with that cacophony happening every evening.

When the technician eventually arrives at the prison to remove the machines, he seems rather reluctant for some reason, but the managers insist he does the deed. However, the moment they are disconnected, there's a massive electricity failure throughout the entire complex, leading to all the prisoners escaping due to lack of electric security systems.

Of course, the managers are outraged, and start shouting at the technician: "What the hell did you do? I told you to remove those damn drying boxes, not let all the inmates escape!"

The technician says, calmly, "I thought you knew what would happen if those drying machines were removed..."

This does nothing to assuage the managers' anger, and they keep demanding an explanation as to why they should have know that there would be a power cut. After several minutes of argument, they finally get one.

"Don't you remember?", says the technician. "The mighty con drier is the powerhouse of the cell..."
Waldo is being interviewed by the press at the Super Bowl. Waldo, how much did you pay for your ticket? Did you get a good seat? Where will you be sitting to watch the game?

"I'm just here so I won't get found."
British scientists have demonstrated that cigarettes can harm your children  Fair enough, use an ashtray.
A woman walks into Walmart She's wearing very dirty clothes, smells bad and looks like she is in a horrible situation. She has 2 kids who look worse in her shopping cart 

The store clerk says: Wow, are they twins? 

Woman: No you idiot, they obviously look 2 years apart. 

Clerk: Oh, they don't look alike. I just couldn't believe you had sex twice.
Yo moms pussy is so bushy It did 9/11
My friend gave me his Epi-Pen while he was dying. I guess he just really wanted me to have it as a last wish...
How do you get down from an elephant? ...


You don't. You get down from a goose!
When a fly drops 5 inches A fly flies back and forth over a river repeatedly, dropping five inches each time. A fish sees it and decides it will jump and catch it when it drops.
A bear sees the fish and decides it will get the fish when it jumps.
A hunter with a cheese sandwich in his pocket sees the bear and waits for it to go for the fish to shoot it.
A mouse sees the cheese sandwich and decides to wait for the hunter to shoot so that the sandwich will fall and he can get it.
A cat sees the mouse and decides to wait for it to go for the sandwich to jump and catch it.
So, the fly drops, the fish jumps, the bear goes for it, the hunter shoots, the sandwich falls, the mouse goes for it, and the cat jumps, but he misses and goes into the water.
The moral of the story: when the fly drops five inches, the pussy gets wet.
What did the mathematician say when she squared i? Shit just got real.
My doctor used two fingers during my prostate exam... He said he needed a second opinion. 
A man walks into a bar ... ... and tells the bartender, "*Quick! Give me a shot of whiskey before the trouble starts!*"

The bartender pours the drink, patron downs it, looks around, and repeats, "*Quick! Give me another shot before the trouble starts!*".

This goes on again and again for 9 more shots. Finally the bartender asks, "*When is the trouble going to start?*"

The man says, "*When you find out I don't have any money.*"
My sexually ambiguous child just handed me some money. It was a trans-action.
Kim Jong Un is like a Penis shaped potato. He's a little Dick-Tater.
Isis bumper sticker I'd rather be heading.
I'd love to watch 48 Hours But it would be Monday by the time it's finished and ain't nobody got time for that.
What do apes call sunbathing? Orangutanning.
I went for a job interview today... "Describe yourself in one word."
"Indecisive, maybe. I'm not sure."
Hey I just met you, And this is crazy,
I have Alzheimer's,
Hey I just met you.
I got into a car accident just now. My wife and children are dead and I'm not doing too well myself. Luckily, it only hurts when I laugh. HahaHahaahahahaha. Hahahahahaha. Hahahahahahaha.
Mother: Son, your teacher told me you've been swearing in school Boy: Mom, do you believe everything that fucking bitch says?
Hillary Clinton is starting her own Television show. It was going to be called The Biggest Loser but that was taken so she is going with The Biggest Liar.
When I was in college, my roommates would have sex with anything that moved. I never felt the need to limit myself that much. 
What is it called what a man goes down on a woman in a bar? A pub.lic display of affection 
What do you call a deer with no eyes? No ideer

What do you call a deer with no eyes and no legs? 

Still no ideer 
How do you become a millionaire with horses? You start as a billionaire.
I discovered my wife in bed with another man, and I was crushed. So I said, "get off me you two!" 
Did you hear about the guy who made an outfit out of super glue? It was hard to pull off.
How do you keep an idiot worried for a day? I'll tell you first thing tomorrow
What do you call a carabao who can climb a tree? Awesome!!!
This is my step ladder. I never knew my real ladder.
Death and My Dad I want to die peacefully and in my sleep like my father did, not screaming in terror like his passengers.
I want to die peacefully in sleep, just like my father. Not screaming in horror like passengers in his bus.
Donald Trump Worst joke I ever told.
My mother was in a car crash but luckily she was okay... WAS okay, she's dead now.
How do you find Ronald McDonald at a nude beach? He's got sesame seed buns
A man had his credit card stolen... However, he decided not to report it because the thief was spending less than his wife did.
Don't you hate it when you think of something funny to post and... you forget to reddit down.
What do you call a rain of strategy games? A Tropico storm
I asked my girlfriend if we could have sex tonight. She said she wants to remain a virgin until her wedding night...butt fuck it.
People take so much for granted. Like punchlines.
Why Do Lesbians Like Cats So Much? Because a dog is a man's best friend. 


How many planets are there? Guy: How many planets are there?
Girl: 8
Guy: Wrong, 7 after I destroy uranus
What did the clock do after night left him? He was in mourning.
Violence is the only option. Unless a mosquito lands on your dick, then it's a hostage situation.
What does a good carpenter and a 20 years old girl have in common? No wood gets wasted 
I write my mistresses' phone numbers on the rear view mirror. I know my wife would never think to look there.
My Ex Girlfriend was getting beaten up at a bus stop by 5 guys, so as a human being I had to step in and help.... She didn't stand a chance against the 6 of us
Why do the newly rich like to buy Rolex watches? To know when it is time for a new wife. 
If I had a dollar... For every time I disappointed my family, I would have enough to make them proud.
What's worse than finding a worm in your apple? Finding half a worm in your apple.
People here take so much for granted. If you took away someone's car, house and clothes, They'd have nothing. But if you did the same to someone from one of the poorest countries, they'd probably still have aids.
Mr. President, two brazillian soldiers died in our military strike in Yemen. "Oh my god... Do we have to file for bankruptcy already?"

I let a pasta chef borrow my car He returned it all denty. 
Why are blonde jokes so short? So men can remember them.
What's the best thing about dating a feminist? When you go out for dinner you only have to pay for your half!
Jesus may have been offended Elderly couple in church during Easter mass. Wife turns to husband and says, "I have just done a silent fart, what should I do?" Husband says, "put new batteries in your hearing aid!"
Anal with my girlfriend makes my whole day But it makes her hole weak
Time Machine **What do we want?**

*Time machine!*

**When do we want it?**

*Doesn't matter!*
I'm working on my second Billion dollars. My first billion didn't work out so I've moved on to my second.
I attempted suicide today Won't ever do that again, I almost killed myself 
How many contractors does it take to screw in a light blub? None, it's a union job.
A Young Blond Suspects A Affair A young blonde woman is distraught because she fears her husband is having an affair, so she goes to a gun shop and buys a handgun. The next day she comes home to find her husband in bed with a beautiful redhead. She grabs the gun and holds it to her own head. The husband jumps out of bed, begging and pleading with her not to shoot herself. Hysterically the blonde responds to the husband, ''Shut up...you're next!''
If I had a dollar for every time someone over 40 told me my generation sucks... Then I could afford a house in the economy they ruined.
Did you know Obama was from Hawaii Kenya believe it?
I took my Indian friend to a Persian restaurant He said the pita was second to naan.
I come off confident and cocky cause i call my dick life. But really its cause life is short.
By accident, I wore my son's shirt to work today. It was a bit tight under the arms. Guess I should have taken his arms out of it before I put it on.
How did the deaf man get his hearing back? His wife slapped a fifth sense into him. 
What kind of bee gives you immortality? A Zom-bee!!!
What do you call a Muslim entering America? Same as every other person, a tourist
So a bartender says, "We don't serve time travelers in here!"

A time traveler walks into a bar.
An eagerly-awaited cook book "Cooking with Herbs" finally released! It's about thyme.
What's it called when you mix champagne with orange juice at breakfast? Alcoholism   
Did you see the new "American Tail" movie with Donald Trump in it? Fievel goes back to Russia. 
On a scale of 0 to 1, I think I'm two funny!... Well maybe, on a scale of 0 to 1, I'm nought funny.
Police: Where do u live? Police: Where do u live?
Me: With my parents.
Police: Where do your parents live?
Me: With Me.
Police: Where do you all live?
Me: Together.
Police: Where is your house?
Me: Next to my neighbors house.
Police: Where is your neighbors house?
Me: You won't believe me if I tell you.
Police: Tell Me!
Me: Next to my house. 
Fell asleep at a house party last night and someone put a teabag in my mouth, I went fucking mental... No one treats me like a mug
I heard Beyonce is having twins... !RemindMe 18 years
A jew, christian, and muslim all walk into a bar... the muslim explodes 
A young blonde woman is distraught because she fears her husband is having an affair,  A young blonde woman is distraught because she fears her husband is having an affair, so she goes to a gun shop and buys a handgun. The next day she comes home to find her husband in bed with a beautiful redhead. She grabs the gun and holds it to her own head. The husband jumps out of bed, begging and pleading with her not to shoot herself. Hysterically the blonde responds to the husband, ''Shut up...you're next!''
Rory Schlein, the Australian speedway racer, was seriously hurt while driving into a closed gate at a racetrack. Right before he hit the gate, he and his crew chief were tossing terrible jokes back and forth over the radio.  Rory was talking about people lining up haphazardly to get hit in the face when his crew chief yelled, "That's not open Schlein!"
What do Donald Trump's toupee and a thong have in common They both barely cover an asshole.
So my drug dealer sold me a pair of shoes. I don't know what he laced them with, but I'm tripping.
A man walks into a balloon store. The storekeeper asks, "What can I get for you today?" The man says, "I'm looking for some Patriots themed balloons for my Super Bowl party." The storekeeper looks at him for a second, then says,


"Sorry, those are all deflated." 
An F5 tornado went through Arkansas last week... It did $150 million worth of improvements.
The perfect clinic A man is driving down a road an sees a sign for a clinic that says " we cure all diseases for $500, and if we can't we give you $500" the man is Interested and goes in.


When he's with the doctor he tells him " doctor I can't taste anything" the doctor responds by saying "nurse give this man 2 cups of solution A" the man drinks it and says " this tastes like piss" the doctor replies by saying "that'll be $500" the man angered pays and leaves.


At home the man decides to go again to get his money back. He tells the doctor this time " doctor I can't remember anything" the doctor responds by Saying " nurse give this man 2 cups of solution A" the patient responds by saying " hey that's piss I'm not drinking that again" the doctor says " that'll be $500" the man furious pays and leaves. 


The man determined to get his money back returns for a third time and tells the doctor " doctor I'm blind and can't see" the doctor does the usual routine, and the patient drinks it and says he's still blind. The doctor than pulls $5 and says " here's the money" the man replies " this is only five dollars you still owe me $495" to this the doctor replies " that'll be $500"





They say sex doesn't count until you're two inches in So I'll be a virgin forever 
Genetic engineering now allows parents to select the eye color of their children. More great work from the University of Josef Mengele.
The European Vacation Bob Hill and his new wife Betty were vacationing in Europe, as it happens, near Transylvania. They were driving in a rental car along a rather deserted highway. It was late, and raining very hard. Bob could barely see 20 feet in front of the car. 

Suddenly the car skids out of control! Bob attempts to control the car, but to no avail! The car swerves and smashes into a tree. 

Moments later, Bob shakes his head to clear the fog. Dazed, he looks over at the passenger seat and sees his wife unconscious, with her head bleeding! Despite the rain and unfamiliar countryside, Bob knows he has to carry her to the nearest phone. 

Bob carefully picks his wife up and begins trudging down the road. After a short while, he sees a light. He heads towards the light, which is coming from an old, large house. He approaches the door and knocks. 

A minute passes. A small, hunched man opens the door. Bob immediately blurts, "Hello, my name is Bob Hill, and this is my wife Betty. We've been in a terrible accident, and my wife has been seriously hurt. Can I please use your phone??" 

"I'm sorry," replied the hunchback, "but we don't have a phone. My master is a Doctor; come in and I will get him!" 

Bob brings his wife in. An elegant man comes down the stairs. "I'm afraid my assistant may have misled you. I am not a medical doctor; I am a scientist. However, it is many miles to the nearest clinic, and I have had a basic medical training. I will see what I can do. Igor, bring them down to the laboratory." 

With that, Igor picks up Betty and carries her downstairs, with Bob following closely. Igor places Betty on a table in the lab. Bob collapses from exhaustion and his own injuries, so Igor places Bob on an adjoining table. 

After a brief examination, Igor's master looks worried. "Things are serious, Igor. Prepare a transfusion." Igor and his master work feverishly, but to no avail. Bob and Betty Hill are no more. 

The Hills' deaths upset Igor's master greatly. Wearily, he climbs the steps to his conservatory, which houses his grand piano. For it is here that he has always found solace. He begins to play, and a stirring, almost haunting, melody fills the house. 

Meanwhile, Igor is still in the lab tidying up. His eyes catch movement, and he notices the fingers on Betty's hand twitch. Stunned, he watches as Bob's arm begins to rise! He is further amazed as Betty sits straight up! 

Unable to contain himself, he dashes up the stairs to the conservatory. He bursts in and shouts to his master: 

"Master, Master! ... The Hills are alive with the sound of music! 
I had an idea for a movie plot. A retired CIA agent searches for his kidnapped daughter in Paris, but it turns out that idea was taken. I had another idea for one where the same agent is kidnapped with his wife in Istanbul, but it turns out that one was taken too.
USSR- United States Snowflakes & Retards.
How do you create a hipster? Give a homeless guy an iPhone. 
Teacher: If you have 52 watermelons in one hand, and 43 apples in the other, you give 7 fruits to your friend, what do you have? Student: A friend
A recent study has found that women who carry a little extra weight live longer ...than the men who mention it.

A pirate goes to a doctor... A pirate goes to a doctor, worried that the moles on his back might be cancerous. The doctor inspects them.  
"It's ok," he says. "They're benign."  
The pirate replies "Check 'em again matey, I think there be at least ten!"
3 President to Heaven George Bush , Barack Obama & Donald Trump are going for a job interview with God God asks Bush " " What do you believe in ? " Bush answers ga ' ' I believe in the free market , fighting evil at the battle front & the strong American nation ! " God is impressed by Bush & tells him ( " Great , come sit on the chair on my right " Next , God asks Obama , " What do you believe in ? " Obama answers 4 ) " I believe in the power of democracy , helping the poor , world peace , and promoting that men of all colors are no different " God is really impressed by Obama & tells him " Well done , come sit on the chair on my left . Finally , God asks Trump . " What do you believe in ? " .. Trump answers " I believe you 're sitting on my chair . " 
Two cannibals are eating Carlos Mencia. One of them turns to the other and says, "Hey, didn't we see this joke yesterday?"
My wife treats me like God, she ignores me until she wants something 
How does a Trump supporter fit 50,000 books in their living room? In the fireplace.
I know that Jesus was black Because he was carpenter yet you never heard about him building anything 
Why do so many blues musicians come from Korea? Theres a lot of Seoul 
What did the oceans say to eachother? Nothing, 

they just waved. 
A man sits down next to a lady reading a newspaper by the window on a bus... He can't help himself and has to fart so he does his best to sneak it out. He glances over and she doesn't seem to notice. Relieved, he decides to attempt light conversation.

"Are you done with that newspaper?" he asked.

She replied "No, but next tree we pass, I'll grab you some leaves".


How does a chemistry teacher pick up girls? "Hey baby, wanna head back to my place and form a covalent bond?"
How many Freudians does it take to change a light bulb? Two 

One to screw in the lightbulb and 1 to hold the Cock 

Edit: Father 

Edit2: Ladder 
What's the difference between and out law and an in law? Outlaws are wanted. 
Why can't t-rex clap their hands? Because they're all dead. 
An introvert walks into a bar... Then immediately walks out because fuck that shit.
Hooters Hooters is known for two things......boobs
A bear was taking a dump in the forest when a rabbit hopped by... The bear asked the rabbit, "Does poop stick to your fur?"

The rabbit said, "Yes, but it washes out easily enough."

So the bear picked him up and wiped his butt with him.








Then the rabbit fainted.
Hey buddy do you want to see the game this Sunday? *Puts on 1997 movie "The Game" by David Fincher* 
A man is waiting for a bus, when he sees a blonde across the street digging a hole... ...and another blonde immediately filling the hole back in with dirt. He watches as they move up the street doing this over and over again. The first blonde digs a hole, and the second one fills the dirt right back in. After a few minutes, he decides to ask them "excuse me, what are you ladies doing?"         
"We're working" the first blonde replies.        
"Just the two of you?" He inquires.       
"Well" the second blonde chimes in, "there's usually three of us, but the girl that plants the trees called out sick" 
Two old women on a plane and sitting next to each other Two old women on a plane sitting next to each other one
black the other white.

Black:What would you do if the plane were to fall out of the sky and crash?
White:I would put on my best clothes and all my most expensive looking jewelery
Black: what! why?
White: because they rescue the rich white women first. What about you?
Black: Id strip down naked
White: What! why?
Black: because they rescue the black box first.

When in doubt ... Wife : I doubt my husband has been cheating on me.... I have doubt on one woman we both know.... What to do?

Shrink:  Take your husband to that woman's doorstep and see if his wi-fi connects automatically.
[Long] A merman named Mike is working as a bodyguard for some celebrity's huge undersea party. He is informed that there is some merman here plotting to kill the celebrity, and watches everybody with suspicion. Soon, he is allowed a break while another bodyguard fills in, and on this break he meets a beautiful mermaid. 

"Hello." she says rather shyly. "Enjoying the party?"

"I suppose," Mike says. "I don't get to enjoy much of it as a bodyguard though."

"Well that's fine. Maybe we could chat for a while until your break's over."

And so they did. It was a fairly long conversation, and they kept talking and talking about a lot of stuff until the mermaid said she had to go. After giving Mike her number, she swims out of the door in a hurry.

Mike's break is over soon after that, and he returns only to find the celebrity dead, the bodyguard dead, and the beautiful mermaid standing over them with a pistol. She aims the pistol at Mike.

"Just one last thing before I die- why?" asks Mike. "I heard it was a *merman* plotting to assassinate the celebrity."

"And you heard right." the mermaid said with a laugh. She tore off her wig, lowered her voice, and cackled once more. "It was all a disguise." said the merman assassin.

I guess that assassin wasn't all he was *maid* up to be.


Bowling Green Massacre jokes are in bad taste Show some respect for the victims!
Apple has now turned to medical accessories!! their first product is the Ipatch!
What's the difference between Donald Trump and a baby polar bear? It will be a year before the baby polar bear kills its first seal.
Trump is walking around the White House lawn after the first snowfall as president... On the south lawn he sees that someone has written "Trump Sucks!" in pee in the snow. Thin-skinned as he is, he's furious and calls a staff meeting to investigate who did it. After two days, his investigation team tells him that they have good news and bad news.

The good news was that they found the culprit and it was Obama. The bad news was that it was in Melania's handwriting.
I have a girlfriend but.... "But what?"
"She's in another nation"
"Which one?"
"Imagination"
What's the difference between 3 dicks and a joke? Your mom can't take a joke.
What kind of pants does a scientist wear? A pair of genes.
Why can't you wear 'Y' fronts in Russia? Because Chernobyl fall out. 
What did the hurricane say to the coconut tree? Hold your nuts this is no ordinary blowjob!
Yes, I’ve lost to my computer at chess... But it turned out to be no match for me at kickboxing.
Why do people never eat clocks? Because it’s really time consuming.
My son got hold of my autobiography and threw the pages all around the house. I really need to sort my life out. 
Short gun story A man walked into a crowded bar waving his unholstered pistol and yelled, "I have a colt 45 model 1911 with a seven round magazine plus one in the chamber and I want to know who is sleeping with my wife!"

A voice yelled from the back of the bar, "You're gonna need more ammo!"
If I ever go missing, you should put my picture on beer rather than milk bottles... This way, my friends will find me faster.



In Trumps America he's not Aladdin He's Aladout
Job interview in a psychiatry... So you’re interested in working with us. What is your experience with mentally disturbed people?

I’ve been on Facebook for 5 years now.

Very good, the job is yours.
What perches on your computer and says "Pieces of seven, pieces of seven"? A parity error
My friends asked me to impersonate a lion. It was a roaring success. 
I've spilt paint. It's a dyer situation.
A software engineer walks into a bar. He sits down and sees the bartender yelling at the computer when trying to process a customer's order.

"Why are you yelling at the computer?" the engineer asks.

"Nothing is working! The software on the computer is riddled with bugs!" responds the bartender.

The engineer takes a look at the computer and notices the software it is running was actually written by himself a few years earlier. Immediately, he gets offended.

"Those aren't bugs!" the engineer yelled. "Those are alternative features!"
Have you ever pissed in the shower? "Have you ever pissed in the shower?" my girlfriend asked, 

a little embarrassed I said "I don't like to admit it but yes.. I have,"

"That's Fucking disgusting!!" she exclaimed

"well these things happen when you're talking a shit!!"
The neighbours kept me up last night because they were having sex into the early hours of the morning. I would have asked my wife to knock on their door, but she was out playing tennis with her friends.
I was gunna write the great American nursing home romance novel... ....but the title "50 Shades of Grey" was already taken.
What’s the difference between a tire and 365 used condoms? One’s a Goodyear. The other’s a great year.
Porn is so unrealistic Just took a shower with my girlfriend.....

And stood in the corner freezing for 20 minutes handing her different shampoos.
What’s the difference between anal and oral sex? Oral sex makes your day. Anal makes your hole weak.
How many wizards does it take to change a lightbulb? Six. 

One Slytherin to break it. 

One Gryffindor to volunteer to change it. 

Three Hufflepuffs to hold the ladder to ensure the safety of the Gryffindor student. 

And one Ravenclaw to point out that they could have just used magic in the first place. 
A blonde walks in on her boyfriend cheating on her She pulls out a gun and says: I'm done with you!

Boyfriend: Calm down, calm down. We can settle this with words.

The blonde puts the gun to her head

Boyfriend: What do you think you're doing?

Blonde: Don't  worry, you're next. 

A day before his 15th birthday the son of a wealthy family was asked by his father, "Well my son, what would you like for your birthday?"

The son hesitated a moment and his father's thoughts leapt ahead to a new computer and similar things. However, his son had had a new computer only recently and could have a new one any time he wished.

Finally, the son said, "Father, I have everything a boy could wish for, but there is one thing I would really like. I would love to have a pink ping pong ball."

The father was rather astonished at this wish, but said, "If it is a pink ping pong ball that you want, a pink ping pong ball you shall have."

And so, the next day, the son was given as his bithday present a pink ping pong ball.

The boy took the ball to his room and the next morning the pink ping pong ball was gone. The father was mildly surprised but decided not to say anything. The pink ping pong ball, however, was never seen again.

The next year, a day before his 16th birthday, the father asked his son what he would like for his birthday.

"Father," replied the son, "I have everything a boy could possibly wish for, but there is one thing I would really, really like. I would love to have a tenpack of pink ping pong balls."

The father was more surprised than the year before, but kept his curiosity at bay, for he knew that his son had a right for privacy. he said therefore, "If it is a tenpack of pink ping pong balls that you want, a tenpack of pink ping pong balls you shall have."

And so, the next day, the son was given as his birthday present a tenpack of pink ping pong balls.

The boy took the tenpack of balls to his room and the next morning, not a single ball remained, merely the empty husk of the tenpack. The father wondered where ten pink ping pong balls might disappear to, but decided not to say anything. The pink ping pong balls, however, were never seen again.

The next year, a day before his 17th birthday, the son was asked by his father what he would like for his birthday.

"Father," said the son to this, "I have everything a boy could wish for, but one thing would make my happiness complete. I would dearly want a carton of pink ping pong balls."

The father was beyond surprise, but decided to make sure he had not misheard. "A carton of pink ping pong balls?"

"A carton of pink ping pong balls," the boy confirmed.

"I can't understand your fascination with pink ping pong balls," said the father, "but if it is a carton of pink ping pong balls that you want, it is a carton of pink ping pong balls that you shall have." And so, the next day, the boy was given as his birthday present a carton of pink ping pong balls.

The boy was delighted and took the carton to his room. The next day, miraculously (as if by magic, even) the pink ping pong balls had all disappeared.

"Dear son," said the father, "I must ask now, what do you do with all those pink ping pong balls?"

The son, however, was reluctant to tell him. "Please humour me, dear father."

The carton of pink ping pong balls, however, was never seen again. The next year, it was clear that the son would get a car, but the father felt that, perhaps, his son also had some other wish apart from the obvious. So, one day before the son's 18th birthday, the father asked him whether he had a special wish for his birthday. "Dearest father," the son started, "I have everything a young man could possibly want, but there is one craving in me. I would, more than anything, want a warehouse full of pink ping pong balls." One of these years, his father thought, I should get to the bottom of this. However, he decided to humour his son's wish. At least he had been wise enough to buy shares in a pink ping pong ball factory. The next day, the son was given the address of a warehouse where all his new pink ping pong balls were stored. The son was delighted and decided to spend the next night in the warehouse rather than at home.

The following morning, the son stepped out of the warehouse, but it seemed to be empty otherwise. The father had a closer look and indeed, apart from empty cardboard boxes, nothing was left inside the warehouse. No pink ping pong balls were left.

The following year, one day before the son's 19th birthday, the father braced himself for another warehouse of pink ping pong balls. He asked his son what his deepest desire was and he had not been entirely wrong.

"Father, you have made me very happy these last years and this year I ask of you a shipload of pink ping pong balls if at all possible." It was possible, if only because the father had by now bought each and every factory of pink ping pong balls in the country. The next day, the father took his son to the harbour and showed him a huge tanker and told his son that there were millions, billions, trillions of pink ping pong balls in there.

"Father," the son said, "You've made me very happy yet again." That night, the son spent on board the tanker.

The next morning, not a single of the pink ping pong balls could be found, but the son was happy.

A few days before his 20th birthday, however, the son had a terrible road accident and was taken to the hospital.

His father visited the young man in hospital. "My dear son! Can I bring you anything to make you feel better?"

Weakly, the son sat up in bed. "Father, dearest father, grant me this wish; just one tenpack of pink ping pong balls."

The father held his son's hand tightly. "Whatever you wish my son, but I have to give you one condition. Even if it may be embarrassing, I must know what you did with all those pink ping pong balls."

"Very well, father, but please indulge me first. I will tell you whatever you wish to know after you have given me the ten pink ping pong balls."

The father thought that was fair enough and the next day brought his son the ten asked for pink ping pong balls. The son smiled weakly but seemed too weak to talk.

"Son, I leave these pink ping pong balls with you and shall come back tomorrow to ask of you what you have done with all those pink ping pong balls."

The son nodded weakly.

The next day, less than surprisingly, no pink ping pong balls could be found in the son's hospital room.

"Now, my dearest son, apple of my eye, treasure of my life, please tell me what you did with all those pink ping pong balls," the father requested.

The son nodded and the father gripped his hand tighter.

"I-" the son started and sat up a bit, swallowing with a dry mouth.

"I- I-"

Then he died.
Hillary Clinton is getting her own video game. Left 4 Dead: Benghazi
Why do vegetarians give good head? Because they’re used to eating nuts.
My roommate claims I'm schizophrenic. We'll show him.
An old man is met by his attorney... ...and is told he is going to be audited. He rides to the IRS office with his attorney, and when he gets there, he begins to talk with the IRS agent. 

"I bet $2,000 I can bite my own eye!" The IRS agent agrees to the bet, believing it an impossible task. 

The old man laughs, pulls out his glass eye, and bites it. The IRS agent is dumbfounded. The old man bets $3,000 he can bite his other eye. The IRS agent knows there's no way possible to do this, so he once more agrees. The old man cackles, pulls out his dentures, and bites his eye. 

 "I bet $20,000 I can stand on the far side of your desk, pee over the desk, and get it into your wastebasket, without missing a single drop" the old man wagered.

The agent knows he won't be able to, so once more he agrees. The old man indeed misses, peeing all over the desk, and on the paperwork. The IRS agent jumps for joy, but then notices the attorney over in the corner moaning. 

"Are you all right?" asks the agent.

 "No! On the way over here, he bet me $400,000 he could pee on your desk and you'd be happy about it!" exclaimed the attorney.


How many millennials does it take to screw in a light bulb? None, it's already lit, fam.
Why does the National Football League deserve Tax-Exempt Status even though it generated at least $9 billion in revenue last season? Because it is just as real as the other religions.
The most attractive part of Amy Schumer is.... Her Gravitational pull.
If you're a guy applying for a porn agency... Do you send headshots or headshots?
I painted my computer black to make it run faster... but it just stopped working
When i was 5 i thought the rain was god peeing How silly childish ideas can be...thinking god exists
How does a bass player pick up girls? He says "Hi I'm a guitarist"
Jose Cuervo is about to come out with a new Diet Tequila.... After the 2nd shot, every girl in the bar will look like they've lost 20 lbs.
Why was Six afraid of Seven Because Seven was a registered Six offender.
"Do one thing everyday that scares you." -Eleanor Roosevelt Today, I will fuck a cactus. 
Throwing acid is wrong.. .. in some people's eyes.
How many cops does it take to change a light bulb? They just beat the room for being black.
"How long do I have to live?" "I am afraid you have a terminal illness, you only have 10 to live," said the doctor.
"10 what, days, weeks, months?"
"Nine"
What would happen if Hungary invaded and conquered Turkey? A new kingdom would be formed known as full.  
I want to be a millionaire just like my dad!! “Wow, your dad’s a millionaire?”
“No, but he always wanted to be.” 
two mice chewing on a filmrole..one of them goes.." i think the book was better".. two mice chewing on a filmrole..one of them goes.." i think the book was better"..
I can't get WiFi on my phone Did Tech Support for an ISP

Customer: "I can't get WiFi on my phone"

TS : does routine checks, remote login to router, etc....

TS : "All looks OK here. Can't see your phone connected to the router though I can see a computer and a TV box connected on Wi-Fi. Any errors on the phone?"

Customer: "It looks OK. It worked fine yesterday"

TS : does a bit more digging - can't see a problem

TS : "can you move closer to the router?"

Customer: "I'm in Spain on holidays - the router is back home, would that make a difference?" 
Beyonce has more black people inside her than. Donald trumps cabinet.
they say we learn from our mistakes thats why i am making as many as possible soon i will be a genius.. they say we learn from our mistakes thats why i am making as many as possible soon i will be a genius..
What's the difference between a good joke and a bad joke timing 
I wanted to start a business selling premium dildos, but I think I can't compete with Apple selling overpriced stuff for assholes. 
Yo momma so stupid... ... She didn't realize this was a repost!
Wanna hear a joke about sodium? Na
Wife : I'm leaving you! Wife : I'm leaving you
 
Me : Why?!

Wife : You lie to me constantly!

Me : Ha! You don't just leave the man who invented the spatula, Amber!

What should you do if your xbox 360 gets the red ring of death? Buy a PS3
The Bartender and the boy A man entered the bar to enjoy a drink when suddenly he saw a small boy enters the bar. 

The bartender said to the man. 

"hey, watch this"

The man watches as the boy approaches the bartender and the bartender showed something on each hand. On his left was a 1$ bill while the other hand shows a 10$ bill. The boy grabs the 1$ bill and left the bar. 

The bartender chuckled and says. 

"you see this kid? This kid never learns! Hes been doing the same thing for three months! What a dumb kid"

The man soon finishes his drink, paid and left the bar. 

Outside the bar he saw the same kid buying an ice cream. He decided to approach and ask the little boy. 

"hey kid, why did you take the 1$ bill instead of the 10$?" 

The boy just looks at him and say. 

"mister, if i take the 10$ bill he wouldnt give me anymore money!"
Why do the T-Rex often have trouble high-fiving? Because they're dead.
I asked my wife what we were having for dinner tonight She said, "well firstly,. Going to boil some potatoes. Then I'm going to cook the chicken in the oven." 

"Delicious", I said, "what else?".

"Then I'm going to roast some vegetables and pour us a nice glass of red wine."

Slightly confused, I asked, "That sounds lovely darling. One thing though..."

"...I didn't realise you enjoyed doing that kind of thing?"

"What kind of thing dear?"

"Well, it seems a bit wrong, for our dinner entertainment, to take the piss out of disabled people..."

Badumshhhh

Sorry, I know that sucked ball bags, I just thought of it and tried to make a joke out of it. Gotta try huh?
A college professor asks all of his students to yell out stereotypes for a class project For a class project, a college professor asks all of his students to brainstorm and yell out different kinds of stereotypes.
"All blonde girls are dumb!" yells a boy in the back.
"Sony!" Yells the blonde girl in the front.
After my girlfriend got pregnant, After my girlfriend got pregnant, everything changed.
My address, my job, my phone number...

A new harbour master... A new harbour master decided to send a toll man to a Russian ship and he told him "Be sure to be thorough they usually hide a lot of vodka"

Amazingly the toll man didn't find anything. But 5 days later the ship still hadn't moved so he called the captain to see what the problem was.

"Well your toll man looked everywhere so we had to throw the vodka out the windows and now we are stuck on a mountain of glass."
What language does furniture speak? Forniture Polish.
Past, Present and Future all walk into the bar at the same time... ... it was **tense**
A guy was standing on a roof of a Hotel and threatened to Jump! I Yelled "Do A Flip" I am now Fired from the Suicide Watch...
Have you heard about the terrorists from Hoth? They call themselves Ice-IS!
bathroom joke How long a minutes is, depends on which side of the bathroom door you're on.
Why was the hay upset? Because the straw was about to bale
A teenage boy was delivering papers A teenage boy was delivering papers to an apartment house. While there, a stunning young woman came out of the apartment next to the mailboxes wearing only a robe. The boy smiled at the young woman and she started up a conversation with him. As they talked, her robe slipped open, and it was obvious that she had nothing else on. The poor kid broke into a sweat trying to maintain eye contact.

After a few minutes of flirting, she placed her hand on his arm and said, "Let's go to my apartment, I hear someone coming."

He followed her into her apartment; she closed the door and leaned against it, allowing her robe to fall off completely. Now nude, she purred at him, "What would you say is my best feature?"

Flustered and embarrassed, he finally squeaked, "It has to be your ears."

Astounded, and a little hurt she asked, "My ears? Look at these breasts; they are a full 38 inches and 100 percent natural. I work out every day and my ass is firm and solid. I have a 28 inch waist. Look at my skin, not a blemish anywhere, how can you say the best part of my body is my ears?"

Clearing his throat, he stammered, "Outside when you heard someone coming... that was me"
This is the 21st century. Where deleting history is more important than creating history.
I asked my dad yesterday if he knew how to ruin a good joke.... He fainted.
At work tonight a woman stopped me and asked "Bathroom?" I replied, "No, my name is Chase, but you can piss on my face if you'd like."
Never ask the Secretary of State for directions. All he'll tell you to do is trun right and trun left. ( ͡° ͜ʖ ͡°)
My dad was trembling when I told him my brother and I had gotten jobs as valets. I guess he really didn't like the idea of having parking sons.
A Woody Joke What wood happen if you had a Wooden Car


With Wooden Seats


Wooden Tires


And A Wooden Engine?


It Wooden't Start
A bowlegged doe comes walking out of the woods... And says “that’s the last time I do that for ten bucks”
What do you have when you have two little green balls in the palm of your hand?? Kermit’s undivided attention!
What's the diffrence between a hormone and an enzym? I can make an enzym, but I can't make a hormone
Not sure who this "OP" person is, but it seems like every guy on reddit has slept with his mom.
Did you hear about the man with no arms and no legs? The doctor said he would be arsing around for the rest of his life
the husband said to his wife... husband honey call the  plumber the toilet is stopped up again 

wife wtf! how did it happen again?

husband how do you think it happened

wife well I am not calling him you do it 

husband no you call him 

wife no 

husband call the fucking plumber  

wife fine 

when the  husband came home from work 

his wife was  fucking the plumber 
 well that's what he asked her to do 
What is the worst possible slogan for someone running for president in Germany? Make Germany great again
"Dad, what made you fall ill in Hawaii?" "Poi, son."
Measuring device. The device used to measure people's gullibility is called a Gullibilometer.
I spent last night defrosting the fridge Or "foreplay" as she used to call it
What do Canadians listen to when they go clubbing? Seal
There was a question on my math test that asked whether the slope of a line was positive or negative... I said yes
Yo mamas so fat It takes her 2 trips to haul ass!
/r/Jokes is like America. Nothing Pro-Trump will get a popular vote.
I'm here to kiss ass and chew bubblegum. And I'm all out- wait, shit.
When Trump visited the White House before his presidency... He asked then president Obama how he managed to run two successful terms.

"Simple", Obama replied, "Just get an intelligent wife"

"How do I know my wife is intelligent?" Trump asked.

"Just ask her intelligent questions and if she answers correctly, then you know she is intelligent".  Obama then called Michelle and asked "Darling, your parents have a child, the child is neither your sister nor your brother, who is the child?"

"The child is certainly me", Michelle replied. 

"You see!", Obama told Trump, "that is how I know my wife is intelligent."

On return to his home, Trump called Melania and asked her, "Darling, your parents have a child, the child is neither your sister nor your brother, who is the child?". After serious thinking and scratching her head, Melania is unable to get the answer, she tells Trump to give her some time to think. She goes around asking all her friends but she is unable to get the answer. At the washrooms, she meets a cleaner and asks her "Your parents have a child, the child is neither your sister nor your brother, who is the child? "Simple, the cleaner replies, the child is me".

Amused with herself, Melania walks  to the husband and says, "I now know the answer, the child is our cleaner!"

"WRONG!" Trump yells at Melania, "the child is not our cleaner, the child is Michelle Obama!"
What do you experience when you meditate inside a Turkish prison? The deep state.
What kind of swimsuit do you wear to the zoo? Zuchini
It's so easy to understand people who work at the US mint They make a lot of cents.
I felt a little behind in Middle School It was a major bummer when the cops found out :(
MY DAD.... he was the original gangster copied a million times over here goes.. his words : Last weekend I saw something at Larry's Pistol & Pawn Shop that sparked my interest. The occasion was our 22nd anniversary and I was looking for a little something extra for my wife, Toni. What I came across was a 100,000-volt, pocket/purse-sized taser. The effects of the taser were suppose to be short lived, with no long-term adverse affect on your assailant, allowing her adequate time to retreat to safety.... WAY TOO COOL!   Long story short, I bought the device and brought it home. I loaded two triple-a batteries in the darn thing and pushed the button. Nothing! I was disappointed. I learned, however, that if I pushed the button AND pressed it against a metal surface at the same time; I'd get the blue arch of electricity darting back and forth between the prongs.   Awesome!!!   Unfortunately, I have yet to explain to Toni what that burn spot is on the face of her microwave.   Okay, so I was home alone with this new toy, thinking to myself that it couldn't be all that bad with only two triple-a batteries,... right?  
 
There I sat in my recliner, my cat Gracie looking on intently (trusting little soul) while I was reading the directions and thinking that I really needed to try this thing out on a flesh & blood moving target. I must admit I thought about zapping Gracie (for a fraction of a second) and thought better of it. She is such a sweet cat. But, if I was going to give this thing to my wife to protect herself against a mugger, I did want some assurance that it would work as advertised. Am I wrong?   So, there I sat in a pair of shorts and a tank top with my reading glasses perched delicately on the bridge of my nose, directions in one hand, taser in another.
 
The directions said that a one-second burst would shock and disorient your assailant; a two-second burst was supposed to cause muscle spasms and a major loss of bodily control; a three-second burst would purportedly make your assailant flop on the ground like a fish out of water. Any burst longer than three seconds would be wasting the batteries.   All the while I'm looking at this little device measuring about 5" long, less than 3/4 inch in circumference; pretty cute really and loaded with two itsy, bitsy triple-a batteries) thinking to myself, "no possible way!"   What happened next is almost beyond description, but I'll do my best.....   I'm sitting there alone, Gracie looking on with her head cocked to one side as to say, "don't do it master," reasoning that a one-second burst from such a tiny little ole thing couldn't hurt all that bad.... I decided to give myself a one-second burst just for the heck of it.
 
I touched the prongs to my naked thigh, pushed the button, and HOLY MOTHER, WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION@!@$$!% !@*!!!   I'm pretty sure Jessie Ventura ran in through the side door, picked me up in the recliner, then body slammed us both on the carpet, over and over and over again. I vaguely recall waking up on my side in the fetal position, with tears in my eyes, body soaking wet, both nipples on fire, testicles nowhere to be found, with my left arm tucked under my body in the oddest position, and tingling in my legs. The cat was standing over me making meowing sounds I had never heard before, licking my face, undoubtedly thinking to herself, "do it again, do it again!"   Note: If you ever feel compelled to "mug" yourself with a taser, one note of caution: there is no such thing as a one-second burst when you zap yourself. You will not let go of that thing until it is dislodged from your hand by a violent thrashing about on the floor. A three second burst would be considered conservative.   SON-OF-A- ... that hurt like hell!!!
 
A minute or so later (I can't be sure, as time was a relative thing at that point), collected my wits (what little I had left), sat up and surveyed the landscape. My bent reading glasses were on the mantle of the fireplace. How did they get up there??? My triceps, right thigh and both nipples were still twitching. My face felt like it had been shot up with Novacaine, and my bottom lip weighed 88 lbs. I'm still looking for my testicles. I'm offering a significant reward for their safe return.   Still in shock...
A Freshman Seminar Professor Was Trying To Wow His Students He told them, "In the English Language, a double negative equals a positive.  For example, I didn't not do it equals I did it.  But no double positive in English equals a negative."

A student in the back shouted, "YEAH, RIGHT!"
People say I don't have friends. They're wrong.
I have 10 seasons on DVD.
What does a car do when a ram is running towards it? Dodge.
A guy walks into a bar with an ostrich... He sits down at a table and orders a meal for him and his bird. After the meal, and the check was delivered, the waitress noticed the man pulled out his wallet and dumped the exact amount of the bill onto the table plus a generous whole number tip. She was surprised but grateful so didn't mention anything.
When him and his bird came in again the next night, he ordered a different meal for him and the ostrich, some drinks and a dessert to share. After the check was delivered the gentleman pulled out his wallet and dumped the exact amount of money to cover the bill and still leave a generous whole number tip. Bewildered, but not wanting to be rude, the waitress again said nothing.
The third night the man came in with his ostrich once more, ordered an appetizer, some more drinks, and two more entrees different than before. The waitress brought over the check again and watched closely as the man pulled open his wallet and dumped the contents out, which as expected before, was the perfect amount.
"How do you do it??" She asked, curiosity getting the best of her.
"Well if you believe me, I once was trapped in the desert close to death when I stumbled upon a magic lamp. The genie inside granted me 3 wishes! My 1st wish was to get out the desert so I'd live. The 2nd was to have a wallet that would always have the exact amount of money that I need..."
The waitress interrupted excitedly: "And your 3rd wish was for a magic ostrich?!"
The man laughed, "No my dear, it was for a chick with long legs!"
Why does Arnold Schwarzenegger kill insects? Because he's an ex-terminator 
My friend just said this... "I know I've reached my ultimate form when all I do is hit dabs in my bathroom and watch Naruto." 
Mooncakes put the fat Into gong hei fat choy
Back in 2013, Beyoncé did an amazing 'Lights Out' performance. So did the stadium.
Why is breakfast a prisoners favorite meal? Because he is a cereal killer. 
Everything is so political nowadays I turned on nickelodeon to see Bob the builder building a wall so Dora couldn't explore.  
"I don't need both, but I want both" That's what he said. 
What the difference between carbon and my ex? She could form more than 4 bonds at the same time. 
A female chicken wearing a tie is known to do some weird shit with tentacles. Hentai.
People keep telling me I don't have friends. That's not true, I have all 10 seasons on DVD.
When Donald Trump has sex, his female partner is always on top. Because he can only fuck up. 
How did the dwarf reach the cookies on top of the fridge? He Imp-provised.
A Buddhist walks into an ice cream shop and says make me one with everything.
My dishwasher stopped working today Ironically, my dishwasher got the dishwasher in the divorce
Trump doesn't compare to universeal healthcare Bernie gets a call from Trump asking for advice.

"...Ands that's why I placed the ban, in order to hide my need hand growth serum."

"Even with that serum, your hands are smaller than the medical bill of the average American with my universal healthcare plan."
I was gonna make an anal joke ..Butt fuck it
Muslims say islam is the religion of peace Everyone else says they forgot the S.
Utz and Disney are teaming up to make a new snack food. They're called "Dis-Nutz".
A police officer called his station back on Radio. He was at a murder scene where an old woman shot her husband for stepping on just mopped floor. 

Dispatch: So was an Arrest made ?

Officer: Not yet.

Dispatch: ?

Officer: The floor is still wet.
What time does Sean Connery like to play racquet sports? Ten-ish
She's a beautiful girl, inside and out... I know, because I've been inside her
What's the most popular kind of music in the Czech Republic? Prague Rock 
A deaf man to a man on street : are you deaf? Man on the street : no, I'm deaf! 

First man: oh! I thought you are deaf.
I recall my first time with a condom, I was 16 or so. I went in to buy a packet of condoms at the pharmacy. There was this beautiful woman assistant behind the counter, and she could see that I was new at it. She handed me the package and asked if I knew how to wear one. I honestly answered, ‘No, this is my first time.’

So she unwrapped the package, took one out and slipped it over her thumb. She cautioned me to make sure it was on tight and secure. I apparently still looked confused. So, she looked all around the store to see if it was empty. It was empty.

‘Just a minute,’ she said, and walked to the door, and locked it. Taking my hand, she led me into the back room, unbuttoned her blouse and removed it. She unhooked her bra and laid it aside. ‘Do these excite you?’ She asked.
Well, I was so dumb-struck that all I could do was nod my head. She then said it was time to slip the condom on. As I was slipping it on, she dropped her skirt, removed her panties and lay down on a desk.

‘Well, come on’, she said, ‘We don’t have much time.’ So I climbed on her. It was so wonderful, that unfortunately, I could no longer hold back and KAPOWWWWWWWW, I was done within a few moments.
She looked at me with a bit of a frown. ‘Did you put that condom on?’ she asked.

I said, ‘I sure did,’ and held up my thumb to show her.

She fainted.
This Native American guy claimed I was insensitive to his culture, saying I've never walked a mile in their shoes. I asked What are you going to do? Sioux me?
Caught My wife walked in on me having sex with our daughter. 

I don't know what she was more upset about.  The fact that I was having sex with our daughter or that the abortion clinic let me keep her...
What's Trump's favorite molecular bond? Van der Waals
Good Girls, Bad Girl’s And Naughty Girls Good girls loosen a few buttons when its hot

Bad girls make it hot by loosening a few buttons

Naughty girls unbutton your pants


Good girls wax their floors

Bad girls wax their bikini line

Naughty girls wax your nutsack


Good girls blush during sex scenes in movies

Bad girls know they could do it better

Naughty girls do it with whips and chains


Good girls wear white cotton panties

Bad girls don’t wear any

Naughty girls don’t really give a shit


Good girls think they’re not fully dressed without a strand of pearls

Bad girls think they’re fully dressed with just a strand of pearls

Naughty girls want a " pearl necklace "


Good girls pack their toothbrush

Bad girls pack their diaphragms

Naughty girls pack their dildos


Good girls own only one credit card and rarely use it

Bad girls own only one bra and rarely use it

Naughty girls own the entire Fantasia collection



Good girls wear high heels to work

Bad girls wear high heels to bed

Naughty girls make you wear high heels



Good girls think the office is the wrong place to have a romance

Bad girls think no place is the wrong place

Naughty girls have sex all over the place



Good girls prefer the missionary position

Bad girls do too, but only for starters

Naughty girls add some new chapters in the Kama Sutra


Good girls say no

Bad girls say when?

Naughty girls don’t say anything, they just moan and scream a lot.



Good girls go to the party, go home, then go to bed.

Bad girls go to the party, go to bed and then go home.

Naughty girls go to the party, hit on every guy there and then go home with two of them.


(Saw this from a 2003 mail forwarding chain when I was cleaning my yahoo mail)
Friend told me that I was already the Michael Jordan of my sport I play baseball.
Two southern belles are standing outside on a sunny day Elizabeth: "My husband got me this beautiful diamond ring yesterday, isn't it just precious?"

Evelyn: "How nice for you!"

Elizabeth: "and this beautiful ranch was left to me by my daddy.  Isn't it just wonderful?"

Evelyn: "How nice for you!"

Elizabeth: "And my dear sweet brothers bought me those absolutely majestic horses you see off in the distance."

Evelyn:"Well, how nice for you!". 

Elizabeth:  "Evelyn you're a beautiful, young woman.  Surely the men in your life must take good care of you!"

Evelyn: "Oh they do! My daddy really valued a good education and he sent me to boarding school.  They taught literature, arithmetic, history, and how to speak in polite society.  That's where they taught me to say 'how nice for you' instead of 'I don't give a fuck'" 

Little Johnny's Halloween Little Johnny was on a park bench stuffing all of his Halloween candy in his mouth.

An old lady came over and said. "Son, don't you know that eating all of that candy will rot your teeth, give you acne, and make you sick?"

"My grandfather lived to be 105 years old!" replied Johnny.

"Did he eat five candy bars at a sitting?" the old lady retorted.

"No," said Johnny, "but he minded his own freakin' business."
Two hunters go out hunting in a forest They shoot a deer and begin dragging him back. However, they were dragging it by the tail and the antlers kept getting caught in the bushes and trees. Eventually, they pass by another hunter who advises them that they should hold the deer by the antlers so it doesn't get caught. 

They decide to heed his advice and carry the deer by its antlers.

Soon after a while, one hunter says to the other: "You know, that guy was right. This is a lot easier."

The other hunter says "Yeah but I think we've been walking in the wrong direction"
Chuck Norris walks into a bar Edit: a bar walks into Chuck Norris
A man wakes up one morning to find that he's grown a thick beard and is wearing a turban.... He, being very concerned and disoriented, calls his boss in order to see if he can get the day off. 

Man: "Boss, I just woke up with a turban and a long, thick beard. I think I need a day to figure things out." 

Boss: " So what are you saying....?"

Man: "I'm calling in Sikh."
Why don't blondes get sick very often? Viruses and bacteria also have their pride!
A man is being chased trough a city by two government agents. He sprints through the market, knocking over stands and booths. Then he turns down an alley way. His prosecutors were only mere feet away from him.

They break from out of the alley way and run towards the docks. The man looks out and sees a ferry a good distance away from the edge. He runs down the pier, still being closely followed. With all his might, he leaps from the dock to the boat. He was hardly able to grab on, but he managed. 

The agents men stood at the end of the dock, smiling. The man stood up and it dawned on him; the ferry was coming in. 
Where does The Fonz like to eat? Chic-Fil-Ayyy!
I went to a Charlie Chaplin look alike contest, the guy who won was some German chap,
the judges gave him perfect neins
Q: What's the funniest thing to ever come out of Sarah Silverman's mouth? **A:** Jimmy Kimmel's dick.
Why was the kid swinging? Peer pressure. His friends started to do drugs last month.
What do you call a Northern Iraqi with a yeast infection? A cheese Kurd. 
My wife asked me... "Why do you always rest your hands on top of my head when I go down on you?"
I told her- "Because if I didn't, I'd probably end up applauding."
The Penguin Collector So, there's this guy. This guy collects penguins. He doesn't collect penguin statues or toys or anything, he collects real, living penguins. Penguins of all sorts, Emperor Penguins, King Penguins, Little Penguins, African Penguins, all the penguins. 

Now, these penguins live all over his house. In his bathtub, sink, toilet, fridge, freezer, penguins everywhere. His house is practically bursting with these penguins.

 The mans wife is obviously not impressed with the amount of penguins her husband has.

"Honey," she said to him, "You have got to get rid of all these penguins. We have no room to live. We can no longer afford to have nice things, not only do the penguins ruin everything we own, but we can hardly afford to feed the penguins. You have to get rid of them."

"I can't do that!" The man replied. "I love these penguins. They are like family to me!"

"Either they go, or I go!" She stated.

After pondering this ultimatum for a while the man decides that he does, indeed, love his wife more than all his penguins put together. But what to do with all these penguins? 

"Why don't you donate them to the County Zoo?" His wife asked.

"Great idea! I'll call them tomorrow."

"Honey, you better call them now. I cannot go one more day with these penguins living here."

The man, saddened by his failed attempt to keep the penguins at least one more day, begrudgingly picks up the phone.

"Hello, County Zoo, how may I help you?" Spoke the cheery voice on the phone.

 The man took a deep breath and spoke slowly. 

"Hello, I'd like to speak to the person in charge of accepting donations please."

The receptionist on the other end of the line could hear the sadness in his voice. 

"I'll connect you right away sir" 

The phone was silent for a minute. The man hoped that no one would be connected, that perhaps he could have one last day with the penguins.

"Hello, County Zoo donation office. How may I assist you?"

 The man's heart sank "Hello, I have a very large collection of penguins I would like to donate."

"Penguins?"

"Yes, penguins."

"Like, real penguins?"

"Yes, real penguins."

"That's fantastic!!" The donation coordinator exclaimed "We have been trying to get penguins here for a long time! We have an area all set up, but no penguins to live there!"

The man smiled to himself. This person seemed very excited to get these penguins. At least they would be going to a happy home and they wouldn't be too far away so he could go visit. 

"My wife says I need to get rid of them today"

"Fantastic! Come on down anytime, we will be waiting!"

It was settled. The many attached his trailer to his truck and started loading up the penguins. After spending an hour counting the penguins to make sure he had them all the man closed the trailer door and stared to drive to the County Zoo. The man got about halfway there and sure enough he got a flat tire.

"Damn it!!" The man thought to himself. "The County Zoo is almost closed, how will I explain to my wife if I come home with all these penguins." 

It was at that point that the man saw another truck coming down the road. He flagged the truck down.

"Sir you have to help me! I need to get these penguins to the County Zoo. They are about to close soon and my wife will kill me if I don't take these penguins to the County Zoo today."

"You want me to take these penguins to the County Zoo?" replied the stranger.

"Yes! Please! I'll pay for you to take them to the County Zoo. How about $500. Is that enough for you to take them?"

The stranger took the money.

"Yeah, that should be enough."

So the two men loaded up the strangers truck with all the penguins and off the stranger went.

After a while the man finally got his truck fixed and off he went to the County Zoo. When he got there though the County Zoo was closed. The man started banging on the gate and yelling until a security guard showed up.

"What is your problem?" Scoffed the security guard.

"Please tell me, did my penguins arrive safely, are they all there? May I see them in their new home?" Pleaded the man.

"Penguins? We were excepting some penguins, but we never got them."

"WHAT!?!" The man was furious!! "That jerk stole all my penguins and my $500 was a rude person!!"

"Sorry, sir."

The man needed a way to blow off steam. He decided to drive around for a while before going home to his wife.

After, maybe, 30-40 minutes the man sees the stranger from earlier. There he was. Walking down the street with a row of penguins following him, far as the eye can see.

The man slammed on his breaks.

He hopped out of his car.

He approached the stranger and said,

"Hey! Jerk! How dare you! How dare you steal my $500 and not take the penguins to the County Zoo!"

"Oh." Said the stranger. I already took them to the County Zoo. I had money left over so I was taking them to the movie theatre."






I painted my laptop black... I painted my laptop black in the hopes that it would run faster... Now it doesn't work. :(
why did the cookie go to the doctor? Because he was feeling crumby. jokie
What does a pregnancy and alcoholism have in common? They can both be ended with a twelve step program
You know what really blew people's minds in the '90s? Kurt Cobain's suicide.

Blew his too.
My mom found out I am gay and that she doesn't want me going down a dark road So I told her I was going to start dating black guys from now on.
(Actual true story)
If you're a polyglot, you speak 4+ languages, if you're trilingual you speak three languages, and if you're bilingual you speak two languages. What are you if you speak one language? American
Trump is eco-friendly He'll build his wall out of the (99%) recycled material on /r/Jokes
How to know if your girlfriend is a slut on your first night. Requirements : a blue paint, a red paint and a hammer.

Steps :
1. Paint one of your balls blue and the other one red.

2. Proceed towards your first coitus experience.

3. If you find your girlfriend saying "That's the strangest pair of balls I have ever seen", hit her on the head with a hammer.
What do you call someone who has had no friends for 5 years? A Sandy Hook survivor.
Two cannibals are eating Amy Schumer one turns to the other and says "does this person taste funny to you?", the other responds "I though this was pork!" 
Why are married women heavier than single women? A wedding ring has mass.
Have you read the book "The Yellow River"? It's the greatest.
Why can't Jesus play rugby? He won't support the hooker
Have you ever wondered why they have a women's studies major in colleges but no men's studies major? Well actually they do, it's called World History.
3 logicians walk into a bar the bartender asks "is everyone having a beer?"

the first logician says "I dont know"

the second logician says "I dont know"

the third logician says "yes"
Trump passes a travel ban for all his supporters. They are not allowed to leave the county.
What event will Mexico win in the next summer Olympics? Hurdles, high jump and pole vault. 
Asked my dad what LGBT stands for He started with "Lettuce? Bacon. Tomato. What's the 'g' for?"
Obviously I had to reply with "Garnish".

[True story. My dad is not an idiot either, totally normal human.]
Why do people dress up for their flights? Ain't no one got time to dress you before your burial if the plane is falling.

**If hell exists, I just bought 1st front row business class ticket there**
Rockets? Maybe. But the Chinese haven't contributed to aviation. After all, two Wongs don't make a Wright.
If Al Gore had his own drumming software company he should name it... AlGoreRythyms
When I go out with a girl I always look in her eyes If she is not blind, I already know that I have no chance with her.
Did you hear about the robbery at the bakery? The guy ab*scone*ded after the crime.

I'll see myself out...
Scientists have discovered a new gay dinasaour... The Megasoreass 
My friend was reading an anti-gravity book... He couldn't put it down.
Why does Jeffrey Dahmer have a blender on his front porch? So when he gets visitors, he can greet them with a hand shake! 
I watched a porno movie last night... It was pretty good but the plot had a lot of holes.
I hit the gym today. Broke my hand on the entrance doors. 
What is a mountain sized bird made of? Well, part cliff, partridge.
You can predict the punchline If you're a fortune teller...
TIFU by gatecrashing an amputee conference... It was just a bit of 'armless fun.
I’ve never been married, but I can imagine how it feels... I once had a stone stuck in my shoe for 10 hours.

Dunno why people like to associate Comcast with the Nazis It's not like they're the fascist out there. 
Swim Race A local pool was holding a swim meet for the disabled. There were three contestants, one man had no arms, one man had no legs, and one man was just a disembodied head. 

The contestants got up on their blocks and prepared for the race. The starting pistol fired and the three men dove into the water. the man with no arms took the early lead, the man with no legs was gaining ground, and the head sunk straight to the bottom as a trail of bubbles floated to the surface. 

The race ended and the man with no legs swam down to save the head. He placed the head on the deck and after a couple of coughs the head turned to the staff and shouted "You Motherfucker, three fucking years I've been learning to swim with my fucking ears and two minutes before the start you put a goddamn swim cap on me!"

You remind me of a door Because you're a-door-able :}
I tried coming up with a joke about mean people. But they were all just average 
Enough about my weight!!! “I’ve had it with your silly remarks about my weight. I’m leaving you!”

“But honey, what about our child?”

“What child?!”

“Oh, so you’re not pregnant?”
Mommy, why are all the cars beeping their horns? Son: Mommy, why are all the cars beeping their horns?

Mother: Because there’s a wedding going on.
 
Son: But isn’t the horn a warning signal, Mommy?
 
Mother: Exactly, son.

I call my ex-girlfriend Titanic Jack Because she's as cold as ice
what did the pencil sharpener say to the broken pencil.. that he should stop acting so littlepointed..
Yo Mama's like Wal-Mart. Errybody's been to her grand opening!
An Aussie and a Mexican Hitch a Ride on Air Force One An Aussie backpacker and his Mexican mate managed to hitch a ride on Air Force One. They were sitting with their packs beside a pile of parachutes sharing a taco and a vegemite sandwich when an explosion rocked the plane and it started going down. There was a mad rush as people started grabbing parachutes and jumping from the plane.

“I’m sorry,” said the stewardess, “you hitchhikers will have to be last.”  This seemed fair enough, so the hitchers waited until everyone else had jumped.

“Crickey, looks like we get the last two chutes mate” said the Aussie.  

Just then the President came along. He was running late as he had been watching the drama unfold on Fox. “Sorry,” he said. “But I am a great great man, one of the best men. I am the brains of America. The country can’t survive without me so I will need one of the chutes.” And so saying, he strapped on a pack and leapt from the plane.

“What should we do now?” the Mexican asked the Aussie. “There are two of us and only one parachute.”

“Don’t worry mate, don’t worry at all,” said the Aussie. “The brains of America just took my backpack.”

I never understood why everyone hates mean people. I just think their average. 
What do you call it when you commit suicide on Hanukkah A Jewicide
Trump's New Book I was walking in the mall and I saw that there was an Arabic bookstore.

The sign outside led me to wonder just what exactly was in a Muslim bookstore, so I went in.

As I was wandering around taking a look, the clerk gave me the stink eye, but asked if he could help me. I know I didn't look like his normal clientele, so I asked, “Do you have a copy of Donald Trump's Book on his U.S. Immigration policy regarding Muslims and Illegal aliens?”

The clerk said, “Kiss my ass, Get out, and Stay Out!”

I said, “Yes, that's the one. Do you have it in paperback?”
An old woman lies dead on the side of the road... and she has semen in her eyes. The policeman looked at her and said 'Looks like she saw her killer coming.'

(Not sure if this one was posted before, I saw it on another site and couldn't see it here)
ballons ballons are like souls,they wanna go up but they can't and when you pop them,they scream...sorry
A woman tells her friend she is getting married for the fourth time. "How wonderful! I hope you don't mind me asking, what happened to your first husband?"


"He ate poisonous mushrooms and died."


"Oh, how tragic! What about your second husband?"


"He also ate poisonous mushrooms and died."


"Oh, how terrible! I'm almost afraid to ask you about your third husband."


"He died of a broken neck."



"A broken neck?"



"He wouldn't eat the mushrooms."

Did you know that if you spell... Window backwards is window. It's not, but for a second you believed me.
I once tried greeting everyone I met by saying "titanic"... Turns out it wasn't a very good ice breaker
Rape is not funny Unless you are raping a clown 
My life completely changed after I learned Morse Code. To me, "life" just became a series of dots and dashes.
What did the Jamaican say after winning the barefoot marathon? "Da trill of victory always betta dan de agony of de feet!"
It's not that hard to tell an alligator and a crocodile apart.. One will see you later and the other will see you in a while
Fire is hot And ISIS cold
What do you eat when you go hiking? Trail mix
What does an Arab guy say when he's happy? - Yemen!

What does an Arab guy say when something upsets him?

- Oman...
I remember tears in my eyes when dad chopped onions. Onions was a great dog.
Someone asked me to validate their parking So I said, "You did a very good job. I am very proud of you."


^^I'm ^^sorry. ^^I ^^actually ^^said ^^that ^^to ^^someone ^^at ^^work ^^today.
Today I went to my meeting of the Premature Ejaculation group Turns out it is tomorrow. 
What do you call a bird that punches people? Steven Seagull
I went to an international "Flat Earther" convention the other day Turns out they have members all around the world
My friend Gary doesn't know why Richard isn't interested in his donkey... He really wants to get Dick into his ass.
What's worse than ants in your pants? Uncles
Why are people so outraged and grossed out by incest? I think they should get some perspective.  There are much worse things happening in the world and, really, it's all relative.
What does a thesaurus eat for breakfast? A synonym roll.
A bartender walks into a stable The horse says "Why the wrong place?"
My wife asked me, "Why don't you ever come to yoga class with me??"... "That's kind of a stretch for me"
I understand why bakers are addicted to baking bread. Sometimes they just knead it.
I've got Yellow Fever.. Don't hit on me just because I'm Asian
My wife bought a new dress and asked me if it made her look fat I said, "Of course not, honey. It's not the dress. It's your lack of discipline and self-control."
I accidentally ate some food coloring the other day... The doctor said that I'm fine, but I still feel like a little bit of me dyed that day.
Do you know what my grandfather said before he kicked the bucket? How far do you think I can kick this bucket?
A wife treats her husband by taking him to a strip club for his birthday. At the club, the doorman says, "Hi Jim, how are you?"
The wife asks, "How does he know you?"
Jim says, "Oh dear, I play football with him."
Inside the Bartender Says, "The Usual, Jim?"
Jim says to Wife, "Before you say anything, He's on the Darts team."
Next a stripper Says, "Hi Jim! Do you crave the special again?"
The Wife storms out dragging Jim with her & jumps into a taxi. The Taxi driver Says, "Hey Jimmy boy! You picked up an ugly one this time..."
TIL how not to install a fence Ooops... wrong place for this post
What is a feminists favorite operating system? eunuch
How do you get payed for doing nothing all day? Become an FBI agent!
I wouldn't piss on Donald Trump if he were on fire. But for $100,000 a few Russian hookers will.
What is the difference between a refrigerator and a child? It isn't a crime to stick your meat in a refrigerator.
Why doesn't Trump have a pet dog at the White House? He only pets pussy.
My wife is like the biggest fish I ever caught. Just keeps getting bigger and bigger.
My son asked me if I like his hand after he taped a bunch of coins to it I said I like the change.
How do you make one million dollars in a month? Start with five million and become a day trader.
How are cars, computer parts, and animals similar? Dodge Ram, RAM, and the ram.
Donald Trump answers the question: What is 2+2? "I have to say a lot of people have been asking this question. No, really. A lot of people come up to me and they ask me. They say, 'What's 2+2?' And I tell them look, we know what 2+2 is. We've had almost eight years of the worst kind of math you can imagine. Oh my god, I can't believe it. Addition and subtraction of the 1s the 2s and the 3s. Its terrible. Its just terrible. Look, if you want to know what 2+2 is, do you want to know what 2+2 is? I'll tell you. 

First of all the number 2, by the way I love the number 2. It's probably my favorite number, no it is my favorite number. You know what, I mean, you know. So, we have all these numbers and we can add them and subtract them and add them. TIMES them even. Did you know that? We can times them OR divide them, they don't tell you that, and I'll tell you, no one is better at the order of operations than me. You wouldn't believe it. That I can tell you. So, we're gonna be the best on 2+2, believe me. OK? Alright. Thank you."
I Added Paul Walker on Xbox Live We never really get around to playing games though, he's always just stuck on the dashboard. 
I stopped a rape from happening today! All I had to do was stop chasing her.
Lost 130lbs & gained a new life. Soon I'll be rolling in pussy! Girlfriend is gone now, but she left her pregnant cat behind on the bed.
I heard Audi botched their new commercial I guess they can say Audi-ous to their customers.
Every "yo momma" joke has been done thousands of times, by thousands of different people. Kinda like yo momma.
WWII, two Soviet soldiers, who both used to be theater announcers, are sitting in the trenches... Then they hear the radio announcement: "Comrades, it's with a heavy heart that I must tell you this bad news: city of Bryansk was occupied by the Germans today."

One of them says to the other one, "Pfff, you call that a city? Two 500-seaters at best!"
What was Donald Trumps first comment after moving into the Oval Office? "Hey fellas, it's so nice of you to leave some condoms for me in the desk drawer, but their diameter is about 3X too large!"
What's worse than ants in your pants? Uncles in your pants. 
Life as a redditor I saw a pretty girl. Finally I plucked up the courage, and asked for her number.
She said "got a pen?" 
I said yes.
She said "well get back in it you fat fucking pig".
What is red and smells like blue paint Red paint
Mickey Mouse and Minnie Mouse were in divorce court and the judge said to Mickey... "You say here that your wife is crazy."

Mickey replied, "No I didn't, I said she was fucking Goofy."
Jesus and Satan are having a furious argument... Jesus and Satan are having a furious argument as to who is the better computer programmer. They decide to hold a competition and ask God to be the judge. They set themselves up on their computers and begin. They type furiously, likes of code steaming up the screen, for several hours straight. 

Seconds before the end of the competition, a bolt of lightning strikes, taking out the electricity. Moments later, the power is restored and God announces that the contest is over. 

God asks Satan to show what he has come up with. Satan is visibly upset and cries 'I have nothing. I lost it all when the power went out.' 

'Very well, then,' says God, 'Let us see if Jesus fared any better.' Jesus entered a command and the screen comes to life in a vivid display, the voices of an angelic choir pouring forth from the speakers. 

Satan is astonished. He stutters, 'But how?! I lost everything, yet Jesus' program is intact? How did he do it?'

God chuckles, 'Everybody knows.. Jesus saves.'
I don't get why everyone is so worried about Trump. He hasn't even been in office for a month. I'm sure once he has some time to learn and get things done, America will turn out all white.
Just heard Michael Vick retired... Doesn't surprise me. He was an old dog anyways.
An antidepressant a day Keeps me from blowing my head away
I keep telling my female friend that my dick is great... She just needs to be in a position to appreciate it
Why is Charles Umar Terrence-Elliott Able to get so many dates? People always think he's cute, initially.
[nsfw] What did Trump feel when he heard about the civilian casualties in Yemen? Beluga caviar popping against the roof of his mouth.
Whats something that's hard and long and full of seamen? A submarine of course! 
Are people with aspergers really not able to detect sarcasm? Sorry to break it to you, but I think you have aspergers.
Two friends are hanging out one day, Jim, and Bob. And Jim has a black eye. Bob asks, "Hey what happened to your eye?"

Jim sighs and explains, "Well, I was in church, and we're all standing, and well, the lady in front of me, her skirt was tucked into her ass-crack! So I reached forward, and pulled her skirt out! She turns around and pops me right in the face!" 

So, a week later, these two friends meet up again, and Jim shows up with ANOTHER black eye! Bob says "Dude, did you do it again? You can't just pull a lady's skirt out like that!" 

Jim replies, "Nope, nope, so I'm in church again, right? And the same lady is in front of me, and the exact same thing happens! Her skirt was stuck in her ass again! Well, the guy next to me sees it and he pulls her skirt out of her ass-crack! 

But I knew she didn't like that. So I tucked it right back in there!" 
"Dad, I'm a lesbian" "That's okay", says her dad "We still have your sister."

"Sorry dad", says his second daughter "I'm lesbian, too"

Their father sighs: "So nobody here digs men?"

"I still do!" calls his son.
What did Shakespeare say on the last day if his summer vacation? Once more unto the beach
Just heard there's a cure for dyslexia It was like music to my arse
Two police officers crash their car into a tree. After a few seconds one whispers to the other

That’s got to be the fastest we ever got to the accident site.

There's something sinister about the woman who stands next to me at the male sex doll factory She gives me the willies
The MOMA announced that they were opening a new section in the museum for art from Madrid. Nobody expected the Spanish exhibition.
What do you call a guy with no limbs in a pile of leaves? Russell
A New Patent A company has just requested a patent for a laser that prohibits name brand sunglasses: A Ray-Ban ban ray, if you will.
I was so poor growing up If I didn't wake up with an erection I had nothing to play with
Two silk worms Two silk worms had a race.
They ended up in a tie.
A teacher is giving her kindergarten class a spelling test. She asks a boy named Paul to spell the first word. 'Paul, spell dog.' Paul answers, 'D-O-G.' 'Very good!' says the teacher.


She then asks a girl named Mary to spell the second word. 'Mary, spell cat.' she says. Mary answers, 'C-A-T.' 'Well done Mary!' says the teacher.


She then asks a boy named Hussein to spell the third word. 'Hussein, spell discrimination against foreigners.'
The first time I went on a plane, I was such a caveman about it. I got lost and sat on the wrong seat twice, I banged my head on the overhead compartment (twice) and walked right up to the cockpit door mid flight because I couldn't find the toilets, and the flight attendant got upset at me.
Then, I left the plane at the destination and forgot to get my bag from under the seat, so I had to wait til everyone had left and then the FA wouldn't let me go back and get it, said she would get it for me. Asked me where I was sitting, and I didn't have my ticket stub, so I just said "In the back" and she looked at me as if to say "Well you sure as fuck weren't up the front, were you?"

I cried at home and almost quit the co-pilot job the following day.
If I had a dollar every time a baby boomer insulted me... I could afford a house in the economy they ruined
John owned the local florist shop. The shop had been in his family for five generations -- and he loved his work. He was a part of people’s lives, from their first prom, to valentines gifts, birthdays, weddings, and even funerals -- he loved his work, and the town loved him. Life for him, his wife Susan, his mom Louis, and their three kids John Jr (JJ), Alexis, and Peter was perfect.

All that changed though when one day, right across the street, a new shop opened: Holy Brothers Holy Flowers. Intrigued, he went over to introduce himself. Turns out two Friars had recently left their order to open a flower store. They were elderly gentleman who had spent decades tending the garden at their Friary, but ultimately wanted to go live in the outside world. John was friendly, and thought to himself “well, I’m sure this town can support two florists,” so we went back to his store and thought nothing more of it. 

But as time went on more and more people started going to Holy Flowers. A rumor had gotten started that the flowers were blessed, and that you’d get good luck by going there. Sales dropped for John, money got tight, and he started to accrue debt. Finally, nobody came into his store at all any more.

One day, out of desperation, he went across the street to talk to the friars. He said “guys, I need you to move your store. My family has owned this place for five generations and I’m going to lose it.” The friars told him to fuck off.

He went home and told his wife. Thinking a womans touch might help, she went to talk to the friars. “My family is going to lose our home, please move to the next town over.” She was again told to fuck off.

In a moment of despair, they sent their children to go plead their case. JJ, Alexis, and Peter went to see the Friars. “Please sirs, or parents are losing everything, you have to help us out.” They too were told to fuck off.

Next, John’s mother Louis, a kindly, persuasive, but tough woman went to talk to them. She was told to fuck off.

Sitting in his dusty empty store John contemplated his failings while he killed a bottle of cheap whiskey. His store, his future, he’s lost all of it. Sitting in a stupor, a thought drifted into his mind. He remembered an old family – acquaintance. He picked up the phone and called the man, a huge (probably former felon) guy named Hugh. Nobody knew exactly what Hugh did, but he wasn’t a good guy. John’s dad had done Hugh a favor once so they were in his good graces, but this was a man to be respected and feared. 

John explained the situation to Hugh over the phone, who simply said “I’ll deal with it” and hung up the phone. 

Two days later Holy Flowers closed. No explanation, no closing sale, the just shut their doors, drove out of town as fast as they could, leaving everything behind. Customers started coming back to John, and he lived happily ever after.

The moral of the story? Hugh, and only Hugh, can prevent florist friars.
Alaskan Eye Doctor I thought I saw an eye doctor on an Alaskan island... but it turned out to be an optical aleutian.
"I would like to buy some cyanide" A nice, calm and respectable lady went into the pharmacy, right up to the pharmacist, looked straight into his eyes, and said, "I would like to buy some cyanide."
The pharmacist asked, "Why in the world do you need cyanide?"
The lady replied, "I need it to poison my husband."
The pharmacists eyes got big and he exclaimed, "Lord have mercy! I can't give you cyanide to kill your husband! That's against the law! I'll lose my license! They'll throw both of us in jail! All kinds of bad things will happen. Absolutely not! You CANNOT have any cyanide!"
The lady reached into her purse and pulled out a picture of her husband in bed with the pharmacist's wife. 
The pharmacist looked at the picture and replied, "Well now. That's different. You didn't tell me you had a prescription."

Edit: Shit, I forgot! Credit to u/albert3us
Watson walks in on Sherlock having sex with a younger looking girl "Bloody hell, Sherlock! What'd you think you're doing bangin' that chick. She looks like she's in highschool" Sherlock replied, "Elementary, my dear Watson"
A girl on fire. Stopped at a gas station today and I noticed these two officers just standing there next to their car, watching  a woman who was smoking while pumping gas into her car. I thought, wow, what a crazy lady doing that with the police standing right there watching her!

So I went in and got my soda, and as I was checking out, I heard someone screaming, "Look! Look outside!!" We did and what did we all see?!
The woman's arm was on fire!!!

She was running around like a chicken with its head cut off, waving her arm and just going crazy nuts!. 

We all went outside just as the cops took her to the ground. I don't know where it came from, but they put the fire out with an extinguisher. Finally, after all the craziness was over, I started walking to my car and I noticed that the cops were putting her in handcuffs. 

There was a young guy walking next to me and he said, "what the heck?!?" He turned around and walked back toward the cops. I kinda stuck around because it looked like this guy was an idiot and I wanted to see what was going to happen. 

Well... he asks the cops what they were arresting her for, after all, wasn't catching her arm on fire punishment enough for her being stupid? 

I kid you not, the cop looked him dead in the eyes and said, "For waving a Firearm".
Why did Jeffrey Dahmer keep a blender on his front porch? To greet people with a handshake. 
A Filipino, an Indian, and a Pakistani get arrested in Saudi Arabia A Filipino, an Indian, and a Pakistani get arrested in Saudi Arabia for drinking alcohol. They are given a sentence of 50 lashes each. Before execution of their punishments each of them is given a chance to ask a wish.

The Filipino requests that a pillow be tied to his back. The wish is granted and he's given 50 lashes.

Indian asks for 2 pillows to be tied to his back. Again the wish is granted and 50 lashes given.

Now only the Pakistani is left and he asks to please be allowed to make 2 wishes. Reluctantly, they accept his demand and ask what are his two wishes. Pakistani man says:

1. Give me 100 lashes instead.
2. Tie the Indian to my back.
[NSFW]Two Scottish lasses are walking to school one morning... ...when they come upon a man passed out under a tree after a night out drinking. They approach the burly, bearded man and one girl says " I n'er seen a mans penis before. Let's take a peek!" So, they lift the mans kilt and the other exclaims " It looks like a wee chick sitting in a nest! It needs a cute bow!" She pulls a ribbon from her hair, ties it around the sleeping mans member and they continue on their way.

A spell later the man wakes, stands and begins to stretch when he feels a pinch on his boabie. He lifts his kilt and sees a ribbon tied around himself. After a moment he smiles and says to his-self: "Och, I doont know where ye been but I see ye took first place!" 
Voo-Doo Dick A man about to go on an extended business trip decided to buy his wife a couple of toys as a surprise. He came home the night before his flight out with a sex toy called Voo-Doo Dick.

"Voo-Doo Dick?" his wife asked. "What is that?"

"You'll see," he smirked. "Just have fun. It's special."

The next night, she decides to try it out. The directions read, "Voo-Doo Dick responds to your every wish! Just say the name twice and then say where you want it to please you. To make it stop, say 'Cid Ood-Oov return,' and Voo-Doo Dick returns to its bed to sleep again."

She took off her clothes. To test it out, she said, "Voo-Doo Dick, Voo-Dick. My neck." Voo-Doo Dick began to vibrate and floated to her neck and gave her the best neck message she ever had.

She said, "Cid Ood-Oov return," and Voo-Doo Dick floated back to its box quietly.

She said, "Voo-Doo Dick, Voo-Doo Dick, my breasts." Voo-Doo Dick once again floated to her and stimulated her nipples until she was turned on more than she had ever been.

After several minutes of that, she said, "Voo-Doo Dick, Voo-Doo Dick... my pussy." Voo-Doo Dick moved down from her breasts and began to fuck her better than she had ever been before. She had orgasm after orgasm until she'd had enough.

But she couldn't remember the safe phrase to call off Voo-Doo Dick. She tried looking for the instructions, but she couldn't find the paper and the constant vibrating and intense orgasms still hitting her wouldn't let her think.

Finally, she decided she had to get medical help. Voo-Doo Dick was still going at it. She clumsily put on a robe, got into her car, and headed toward the hospital to try to get it removed.

She weaved back and forth all over the highway as more orgasms overwhelmed her as she drove. A few miles from the hospital, a highway patrol car pulled her over.

"What in the world is going on with you, lady?" yelled the patrolman when he got to her window. "You must be drunk, weaving all over the road. All you look damn near naked."

She explained what happened and that she was going to the hospital for help.

"I've heard some whoppers in my day, lady, but that's the worst lie I've heard yet."

"But it's true! The Voo-Doo Dick won't stop!"

"Voo-Doo Dick? Voo-Doo Dick my ass!"

Three blondes were driving to Disneyland... Three blondes were driving to Disneyland. When they were close to the destination they saw a sign: “Disneyland Left”. They stopped, started to cry and finally turned around and drove back home.
What camps are designed for people with ADHD? Concentration camps.
I once dated a girl named Plosion but then we broke up I guess you could say she is an exPlosion
Two bears are eating a cannibal. Two bears are eating a cannibal.

One turns to the other and asks: "Since we are eating a cannibal, are we eating more than one person?"

The Other responds: "HOLY SHIT! A TALKING BEAR!"
Vladimir Putin takes Donald Trump fishing out on the black sea... Vladimir Putin takes Donald Trump fishing out on the black sea. After having his line in the water for a few hours, Donald finally has a bite. And it’s a big one.

At first, he threatens the fish. “I will drop a nuclear bomb on you if you don’t get in this boat.” It doesn’t work. In fact, the fish starts to fight harder. Next, he takes to twitter “This fish isn’t man enough to face me on board this boat. Sad!” The fish isn’t swayed. So finally, Trump shouts “I will send in a Navy SEAL team to kill your entire family!” The fish is scared and quickly jumps on the boat.

Before even taking it off the line, Trump picks the fish up and holds it high above his head. He squeezes its bladder down onto face.

Trump notices Putin looking on in disgust and says, “What? You knew I love Russian hookers pissing on my face.”
Democratic Party [removed]
My Brother has 2 tickets to the 2017 Super Bowl -- HELP! My brother has 2 tickets to the upcoming Super Bowl! He was so excited and paid the $3,500 for each ticket as soon as they went on sale. However, he didn't realize that the game would land on the day of his wedding..

If you are interested, he is looking for someone to take his place.. It will be at St. Francis Church in Des Moines, Iowa at 3:45 p.m. She is 5 ' 7'' and weighs about 145 pounds. She's a great cook, and will be in the white dress! 
Why do Scotsmen wear kilts? a sheep can hear a zipper from 100 meters away
Why can't milk cartons wear flip flops? Because they lactose
What's brown, lonely and sits on a piano bench? Beethoven's last movement.
What do you call a fish with no eyes? Fsh
What's the difference between calling out to your hispanic friend vs calling out to your Ex? You shout "Jorge!" when calling to your friend. You shout "Hey Whore!" when calling to your ex.
Local Hero saves lady from Dog A man in USA sees a dog attacking a girl! He kicks the dog, it dies!

Newspapers report: "Local Hero saves lady from Dog"

Man says I'm not American

Report changed: "Foreign Hero Saves girl from Dog"

Man says: Actually I'm Pakistani

Breaking News: "Terrorist killed Innocent Dog which was playing with a girl"
What do you call a black man whos an astronaut? An astronaut, you fucking racist...
All sex offenders follow the golden rule... You touch you take. 
Why I got divorced HUSBAND: My wife where are you?

WIFE: At home love.

HUSBAND: Are you sure?

WIFE: Yes.

HUSBAND: Turn on the blender.

WIFE: (turns blender on) reeereeeereeee

HUSBAND: Ok my love goodbye. Another day

HUSBAND: My wife where are you?

WIFE: At home love

HUSBAND: Are you sure?

WIFE: Yes

HUSBAND: Turn on the blender

WIFE: (turns blender on) reeereeeereeee

HUSBAND: Ok my love goodbye The next day,

the husband decides to go home without notice, and finds his son alone and he asked him son where is your mother? 

SON: I don't know, she went out with the blender.
There's 4 things I hate in this world. Racism, niggers, and people who can't count. 
Girlfriend asked me what to do this evening... My girlfriend asked me what I wanted to do this evening? Should we go out bowling or should we go upstairs and mess around in the bed? I told her that I am NOT going to put my fingers in some dirty hole where hundreds of guys had put their fingers in before me!!! So we went bowling.
They say that if you are good and righteous you will ascend into heaven... Otherwise you will split apart into small groups.
Adolf Hitler has never touched Call of Duty... ...and yet, he still has a better KDR than me.
Where do you find firehoes? In the alley behind the firehouse.
I hate when people ask me if I'm hard at work... Every time I am, I get written up by the HR lady.
What do you get when you cross semen and cum? SPum
I'm not really a religious person, but I do like to keep my weed in a hollowed-out Bible... I guess you could call me an eighth-theist.
Why is it so hard to find a priest in Amsterdam? They're all high priests.
Two men are walking by a restaurant  Two men are walking by a restaurant and one of them says, "That smells amazing! Lets get something."

The other man replies, "But they don't let dogs in, what are we going to do with them."

The first man puts on a pair of sunglasses and has his friend do the same and says, "Follow my lead."

He starts to walk into the restaurant and the waiter stops him, "You cannot bring dogs in here sir."

The man gets offended, "Excuse me sir! This is my seeing eye dog, I am blind."

The waiter questions this, "But your dog is a pit bull?"

The man replies, "I know, I am a very important person, I need protection as well."

The first man passes through and the second man begins to walk through when the waiter stops him and asks him the same question. The man replies, "This is my seeing eye dog too."

The waiter replies, "Really? A chihuahua?"

The man freaks out, "What?! They gave me a chihuahua?!"
Someone made Bob Ross mad *artistic screeching*
I got fired for sticking my penis in the meat grinder... that punishment was nothing compared to the one I got when I told my wife that the meat grinder's name is Jenny. 
I asked my North Korean friend how it was to live in North Korea He said he cant complain.﻿
How do you make a black person nervous? Take him with you to an auction.


A joke a classmate told me. Simon, if you read this: enough credits? :P
A man was sitting on a blanket at the beach. He had no arms and no legs.  Three women were walking past and felt sorry for the poor man.
  
The first woman said "Have you ever had a hug?"
  
The man said "No," so she gave him a hug and walked on.
  
The second woman said "Have you ever had a kiss?"
  
The man said "No," so she gave him a kiss and walked on.
  
The third woman came to him and said "Have you ever been fucked?"
  
The fellow said "No",
  
She said "You will be when the tide comes in."
A nice, calm and respectable lady went into the pharmacy... A nice, calm and respectable lady went into the pharmacy, right up to the pharmacist, looked straight into his eyes, and said, "I would like to buy some cyanide." The pharmacist asked, "Why in the world do you need cyanide?" The lady replied, "I need it to poison my husband." The pharmacists eyes got big and he exclaimed, "Lord have mercy! I can't give you cyanide to kill your husband! That's against the law! I'll lose my license! They'll throw both of us in jail! All kinds of bad things will happen. Absolutely not! You CANNOT have any cyanide!" The lady reached into her purse and pulled out a picture of her husband in bed with the pharmacist's wife. The pharmacist looked at the picture and replied, "Well now. That's different. You didn't tell me you had a prescription."
What did the pirate say when he turned 80? Aye matey!
One day a senior priest decides that he has nothing to do with religion anymore and to go for the hot sister... 
He approaches to her and says, "I saw Jesus in my dream. He told if we kiss once, we will get rid of our sins". The sister is surprised but she trusts the experienced priest. They kiss.

A few days later, he approaches again. "I saw Jesus in my dream. He told if I touch your breast once, all of our brothers and sisters here will go to Heaven". Sister says "but...". The priests gives a long speech and tells that the order comes from Jesus. He grabs her breasts.

Couple weeks later, he comes and says "Last night, Jesus took me up to the stairs of Heaven and he told we did very good. If we do one last thing, he told, all the Christians will be forgiven from their sins.".     "What is that?" she asks.  "I will need to put my penis between the lips of your vagina. But make sure it does not slip in. You know it is the biggest sin!" replies the priest. She is doubtful but this is the greatest opportunity. She agrees.

Then, BAAM! He slips in and says.. 


"That bastard Jesus pushed me from behind!"
What do you call cheese that isn't yours? Nacho Cheese
Im graduating for my biology study in a few weeks.. Im writing a killer fotosynthesis
Scientists have discovered a rare mutation that causes autosomal dominant inheritance of violent diarrhea In hindsight we should've known something like that would run in the genes.
There's a drunk man, wandering the street... And he comes across a priest. He says to him, "I'm Jesus Christ." 

The priest replies, "No, you're not."

The drunk is confident in his Christ-ness, and says that he can prove it. So the drunk leads the priest to a bar, professing his divinity the whole way.

They arrive and enter. The bartender sees the drunk and says, 

"Jesus Christ, you're here again!"
I had to perform surgery on a lamb's brain yesterday. Just call me a gyro surgeon.
What does a nosy pepper do? Gets jalapeño business 
Why did the pianist go to jail? Because he would only play with A Minor
One shudders to think how much worse the Bowling Green Massacre would have been... ... If it weren't for the heroic intervention by Frederick Douglass.
Joe enters a pun competition Each contestent is allowed to enter 10 puns, so Joe thinks of his 10 best puns and writes them down, after judges decided which puns won, the announcer decided to read off the 10 best, as the last pun was read, Joe was defeated, none of his puns won! 
No pun in ten did
A man walks into a bar in Bangkok... a sign reads: Cheese Sandwich: $1.50
Chicken Sandwich: $2.50
Hand Job: $10.00

The man walks up to a barmaid.

Man: Are you the one who gives the hand jobs?
Barmaid: Why, yes. That's me.
Man: Then go wash your hands! I want a cheese sandwich.
Lady buys cyanide A nice, calm and respectable lady went into the pharmacy, right up to the pharmacist, looked straight into his eyes, and said, "I would like to buy some cyanide."
The pharmacist asked, "Why in the world do you need cyanide?"
The lady replied, "I need it to poison my husband."
The pharmacists eyes got big and he exclaimed, "Lord have mercy! I can't give you cyanide to kill your husband! That's against the law! I'll lose my license! They'll throw both of us in jail! All kinds of bad things will happen. Absolutely not! You CANNOT have any cyanide!"
The lady reached into her purse and pulled out a picture of her husband in bed with the pharmacist's wife. 
The pharmacist looked at the picture and replied, "Well now. That's different. You didn't tell me you had a prescription."
"Aren't you really busy tomorrow?" "Woah buddy don't assume my agenda"
Why did Donald Trump fail his college math class? He was uncomfortable with the concept of integration.
What time do you go to the dentist? Tooth hurty 
How do you make a pound of fat look sexy? Put a nipple on it.
If i had a dollar for every girl that found me unattractive They would eventually find me attractive.
When my grandma died, I got her most prized vagina fart in a bottle. She bequeefed it to me.
Why are hippy drum circles like high frequency radiation? They both cause the formation of free radicals.
What is a pirates favorite toy? Aaaarrhh Sea Boats!
So a guy asked me if I ever dropped my phone in a beer before... I said "yeah, once in a Blue Moon". 
What is the sexual orientation of a bodybuilder? Bicepsual
I want to get back into my house but I can't, There's a door in the way
My girlfriend broke up with me for listening to Linkin Park But in the end it doesn't even matter.
What do you call a schizophrenic fruit? Pearanoid.
A girl goes to the doctor... Putting his stethoscope to the young woman's chest, the doctor said, "Big breaths, dear."

She smiled. "Yup. And I'm not even thixteen yet!"

I won't be getting another iphone because of the horrible shellback. *spellcheck!  Not shellback!  Ducking phone...
It was the first day of school, and the teacher was going around the classroom asking each of the children to spell their names. It was the first day of school, and the teacher was going around the classroom asking each of the children to spell their names.

 "D-O-R-I-S L-E-H-I-G-H," said one, and the teacher dutifully recorded it in her attendance book.

"T-I-M M-O-R-I-A-R-T-Y," said another.

"E-L-S-I-E," said another.

"No," the teacher told the girl, "I need your whole name." 

"Oh," said the girl. "V-A-G-I-N-A."

Why would Groot make a terrible spy? Because he's an obvious plant.
Trump's Inauguration Speech Was Uploaded onto Pornhub "Rich White Man Fucks Entire Country"
How to cheer up your spouse A man comes home from a tough day at work and sits down on the couch. His wife comes up to him and asks how his day was. 

"It was the worst day this month. Everything went wrong and the boss blamed me for everything, even things that I had nothing to do with".

His wife said "I'm sorry to hear that, let me try to cheer you up".

The husband replied "I don't think that there is anything you can do to make me smile today".

"I think I can make you smile with my right hand".

"Not a chance" was the husband's reply.

"What about if I use both of my hands"?

"Nope, it was a really bad day".

"How about I use both my hands and my mouth"?

"That's not going to do it either".

Finally the wife says "how about I use both of my hands, my mouth and my tongue"?

The husband says "OK, let's see what you've got".

The wife walks up to her husband who is still sitting on the couch, she gets on her knees and sticks her thumbs in her ears, flaps her fingers, sticks out her tongue and goes thppplllt!
A few weeks in they're already talking about impeachment... What an un-presidented turn of events.
A man brings his cat.... A man brings his cat to a veterinarian. 
He lives the cat there and returns in two days, as preagreed. 
He asks the veterinarian:
Is my cat still alive?
Still not...
What is the worst part about time travelling jokes? Yours considered a Repost when they take it and go back and use it before you. 


They say an apple a day keeps the doctor away... But my aim is terrible so... 
Wanna hear a racist joke? Nevermind. None of the white people would understand it.
I like my women how I like my pickles. Sweet and petite ( ͡° ͜ʖ ͡°)
A man steps in a diner and orders some coffee... The waitress brings it over and lies it on the table. The moment the man takes a sip, he spits it out, shouting, "This coffee tastes like boiled dirt!", and the waitress says, "I wouldn't be surprised, it was ground this morning."
A Donkey Fell Into A Bowl Of Sugar What a sweet ass
If your mommy ... would sit between America and Mexico Trump doesnt need to build a wall.
One day, Pavlov is drinking in a bar. Then a man enters the bar and rings the bell on top of the door. 

Pavlov says "Oh shit,  I forgot to feed the dog" 
An old man decided his wife was getting hard of hearing So he called her doctor to make an appointment to have her hearing checked.

The Doctor said he could see her in two weeks, and meanwhile there's a simple, informal test the husband could do to give the doctor some idea of the dimensions of the problem.

"Here's what you do. Start about 40 feet away from her, and speak in a normal conversational tone and see if she hears you. If not, go to 30 feet, then 20 feet, and so on until you get a response."

So that evening she's in the kitchen cooking dinner, and he's in the living room, and he says to himself, "I'm about 40 feet away, let's see what happens." 

"Honey, what's for supper?" No response.
So he moves to the other end of the room, about 30 feet away. "Honey, what's for supper?" No response. 
So he moves into the dining room, about 20 feet away. "Honey, what's for supper?" No response.
On to the kitchen door, only 10 feet away. "Honey, what's for supper?". No response.
So he walks right up behind her. "Honey, what's for supper?"

"For the FIFTH time, CHICKEN!!!!"
What do you call a gay version of Donald Trump? Flaming Hot Cheeto!
Why was Biggie mad at 2Pac? It all started when 2pac innocently said, "Yeah, sure, it's cool, invite all the rappers to my party, no biggie."
People all over the country are dropping dead due to high blood sugar... I guess they're suffering from a serious case of Die-betes
Hungry Clock When a clock eats, does it go back four seconds?
I have Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. In my case, it is a sexually transmitted disease.
I saw thor reading a thor comic... to be honest, I think it might be a metathor.
My wife is still upset about me calling her fat 10 years ago... I guess it's true what they say, elephants do remember everything.

Edit: Damn, just realised someone else posted a similar joke recently.  Sorry for the accidental repost, I will go home and rethink my life.
What are the worst kind of jokes? Unfunny jokes
A Knock Knock Joke *Knock knock*

Who's there?

Erma. 

Erma who?

Ermagerd, stop with all that knocking!!!


.... so I was very tired. At least my fiancé laughed. 


Why are Jews so good at racing? Because they used to step on the gas.
You know what's really odd? Numbers not divisible by two.
I love hockey. It's really an ice game.
Where did the geologist husband and mineralogist wife buy their first home? In agated community.
Two cannibals are eating Amy Schumer Two cannibals are eating Amy Schumer 
One turns to the other and asks, "does this taste funny to you?"
The other responds, "no."
My refuel warning is always on, even after I've just filled up! I think I'm being gaslighted.
Why did the rooster cross the road His wife left him
People say that Steve Jobs died to soon. But I think it was a fitting metaphor for his company’s attitude to battery life
What is the most valuable kind of sheep? A ewe.
Two rednecks decide to go to college... Two rednecks decided that they weren't going anywhere in life and thought they should go to college to get ahead. 

The first goes in to see the counselor, who tells him to take Math, History, and Logic.

"What's Logic?" the first redneck asks.

The professor answers by saying, "Let me give you an example."

"Do you own a weedeater?"

"I sure do."


"Then I can assume, using logic, that you have a yard," replied the professor.

"That's real good!" says the redneck.

The professor continues, "Logic will also tell me that since you have a yard, you also own a house."

Impressed, the redneck says, "Amazin!"

"And since you own a house, logic dictates that you have a wife."

"That's Betty Mae! This is incredible!" The redneck is obviously catching on.

"Finally, since you have a wife, logically I can assume that you are heterosexual," said the professor.

"You're absolutely right! Why that's the most fascinatin' thing I ever heard! I can't wait to take that logic class!!"

The redneck, proud of the new world opening up to him, walks back into the hallway, where his friend is still 

waiting.

"So what classes are ya takin'?" asks the friend.


"Math, History, and Logic!" replies the first redneck.

"What in tarnation is logic???" asked his friend.

"Let me give you an example. Do ya own a weedeater?" asked the first redneck.

"No," his friend replied.


"Fag."
Why was the sun annoyed to be called a she? Cause it's a non-binary star
When you say the word poop, your mouth does the same motion as your butt hole. Same can be said for the phrase "explosive diarrhea".
What's the worst type of suicide ? The failed one.
A farmer named Clyde had a car accident. In court, the trucking company's lawyer was questioning Clyde. "Didn't you say, at the moment of the accident, 'I'm fine.'" asked the lawyer?


Clyde responded, "Well, I'll tell you what happened. I had just loaded my favorite mule, Bessie, into the..."


"I did not ask you for any details", the lawyer interrupted. "Just answer the question. Did you not say, at the scene of the accident, 'I'm fine?'"


Clyde said, "Well, I had just got Bessie into the trailer and I was driving down the road."


The lawyer interrupted again and said "Judge, I'm trying to establish the fact that, at the scene of the accident, this man told the highway patrolman on the scene that he was just fine. Now several weeks after the accident he is trying to sue my client. I believe he is a fraud. Please tell him to simply answer the question."


By this time the judge was fairly interested in Clyde's answer and said to the lawyer "I'd like to hear what he has to say about his favorite mule, Bessie."


Clyde thanked the judge and proceeded.


"Well as I was saying, I had just loaded Bessie, my favorite mule, into the trailer and was driving down the highway when this huge semi-truck and trailer ran the stop sign and smacked my truck right in the side. I was thrown into one ditch and Bessie was thrown into the other. I was hurting real bad and didn't want to move. However, I could hear old Bessie moaning and groaning. I knew she was in terrible shape just by her groans.


When the highway patrolman came on the scene he could hear Bessie moaning and groaning so he went over to her. After he looked at her and saw her near fatal condition, he took out his gun and shot her between the eyes.


Then the patrolman came across the road, gun still in hand, looked at me and said, 'how are you feeling?'


Now what the fuck would you say?"
In Soviet Russia, Muslims ban America!!
A woman decided to have a face lift for her birthday. She spent $5000 and felt really good about the results. On her way home she stopped at a dress shop to look around. 
As she was leaving, she said to the sales clerk, "I hope you don't mind me asking, but how old do you think I am?"
"About 35,"he replied.
"I'm actually 47," the woman said, feeling really happy.
After that she went into McDonald's for lunch and asked the order taker the same question.
He replied, "Oh, you look about 29."
"I am actually 47!" she said, feeling really good.
While standing at the bus stop she asked an old man the same question. 
He replied, "I am 85 years old and my eyesight is going. But when I was young there was a sure way of telling a woman's age. If I put my hand up your skirt I will be able to tell your exact age." 
There was no one around, so the woman said, "What the hell?" and let him slip his hand up her skirt.
After feeling around for a while, the old man said, "OK, You are 47."
Stunned, the woman said, "That was brilliant! How did you do that?"
The old man replied, "I was behind you in line at McDonald's."
-when I donate blood I don't have to do it my self, the nurse does it.. -yes but this is a sperm bank and it's different
-awful service
A man with terminal cancer is gazing at the sunset. 
As he's looking back on his life and coming to terms with his death, he gets a sort of primal urge to just start digging a hole. So he grabs a shovel and digs and digs and keeps digging. He digs so far down that he breaks into the roof of a cave, falls to the floor, and dies.

This joke isn't very funny, but it sure is deep!
What's better than 69? 77 because you get ate more. -Redd Foxx
What did the snail say when it rode a turtle? "WEEEEEEEEEEEE"
What do plants use to fill holes in walls, Chloroplast-er 
I love February because it contains two of my favorite annual events Groundhog Day, and the State of the Union Address.

One involves a meaningless ritual in which we look to a notoriously unreliable mammal for prognostication with no basis in reality. The other involves a groundhog.
Who wins an argument? The side with the most points.
What do you call someone who hangs out with musicians? The drummer. 
So, this guy starts a new job and the boss says, "If you marry my daughter, I'll make you a partner, give you an expense account, a Mercedes, and a million dollar annual salary."

 The guy says, "What's wrong with her?"

 The boss shows him a picture, and she's hideous.

 The boss says, "It's only fair to tell you, she's not only ugly, she's as dumb as a brick."

 The guy says, "I don't care what you offer me, it ain't worth it."

 The boss says, "I'll give you a five million dollar salary and build you a mansion on Long Island."

 The guy accepts, figuring he can put a bag over her head when they have sex.

 About a year later, the guy buys an original Van Gogh and he's about to hang it on the wall.

 He climbs a ladder and yells to his wife, "Bring me a hammer."

 She mumbles, "Get the hammer. Get the hammer," and she fetches the hammer.

 The guy says, "Get me some nails."

 She mumbles, "Get the nails. Get the nails," and she gets him some nails.

 The guys starts hammering a nail into the wall, he hits his thumb, and he yells, "Fuck!"

 She mumbles, "Get the bag. Get the bag." 
Hitler seems to get a lot of hate these days, but to the man's credit.. he *did* kill Hitler.
What do women who just got dumped and advanced programmers have in common? They both want closure!
If Melania divorces Donald Trump Then an immigrant will get half of the US in the divorce settlement :)
I'm never sure if it's a Dad joke Are those the ones that hit you later when you're doing something else?  Or the ones you don't get till the weekend?

:(
The teacher asked little Johnny a question... Teacher: If I gave you 2 cats, and another 2 cats and     
another 2 cats, how many cats would you have?

Little Johnny: Seven!

Teacher: No, listen carefully. If I gave you 2 cats, and another 2 cats and another 2 cats, how many cats would you have?

Little Johnny: Seven!

Teacher: Let me put it to you differently. If I gave you two apples, and another two apples and another two, how many would you have?

Little Johnny:  Six.

Teacher:  Good. Now if I gave you two cats, and another two cats and another two, how many would you have?

Little Johnny: Seven!

Teacher: Johnny, where in the heck do you get seven from?!

Little Johnny: Because I've already got a freaking cat!

What's the difference between a rock guitarist and a folk guitarist? A rock guitarist can play all night without tuning and folk guitarist can tune all night without playing.
A man walks into a bar and orders a drink, when suddenly he hears someone say, "Hey, nice tie!" The man looks up to try to find out who said it, but no one was around. 

"Hey! Nice shirt!" The man looks up again, but there's nobody there. 

"Hey! Nice suit!" The man then calls the bartender over and asks him if he keeps talking to him. 

The bartender replies, "It's not me; it's the complimentary peanuts." 

Great Friday morning! My Friday morning fun... so I was pulling into the gas station and when I got out of the car, I noticed these two police officers looking at a woman who was smoking while fueling up. I went in to get a drink and as I was checking out, I hear someone screaming. I look out and that woman's arm was on fire! She was tossing and waving her arm around and just going crazy! I ran outside and the officers had put her on the ground and were putting the fire out with an extinguisher. I saw that the officers put hand cuffs on her and were about to put her in the police car. I was thinking "What in the world?"... so being the concerned person that I am, I asked the officers what they were arresting her for?
He looked me dead in my eye and said... "Waving a firearm!"

I'm worried about my friend. He was bragging about getting a handjob from his teacher. I said, "That's disgusting, you're homeschooled."
Two Russians, Vlad and Ivan, decided to have a race. Both long distance runners, they decided the end would be a large rock a few miles past the Russia-Finland border.

Vlad was ahead for most of the race, but he faltered soon after the border and was passed by Ivan, who won.

"I told you I would win!" said Ivan.

"You may have won," replied Vlad, "but I beat you to the Finnish line."
I gave a girl my phone number and told her to text me when she got home. I guess shes homeless.
Invisible... A psychiatrist's secretary walked into his study and said, "There's a gentleman in the waiting room asking to see you. Claims he's invisible."

The psychiatrist responded, "Tell him I can't see him."
Two kids were talking... Kid 1: I bet you're a virgin

Kid 2: I was a virgin, until last night!

Kid 1: Lies!

Kid 2: Ask your sister.

Kid 1: Ha! I don't have a sister!

Kid 2: You will in about nine months!


Edit: Thanks for the support guys!
Whatever you do always give 100 %. Unless you are donating blood.
What did the cell say when his sister stepped on his toe? Mi to sis 
When I see a girl, I first look at her hair. Then at her eyes, lips, neck... Damn dial-up!
Told my wife I was going to give her something for Valentines I've never given her before She said "An orgasm?"
What did the DNA say to the other DNA? Do these genes make me look fat?
"May I sleep with your sister?" is such an awkward question to ask. I have no idea how my dad is going to respond.
How will Trump add yuge amounts of manufacturing jobs? He will build alternative fact-tories
Why do women wear make-up and perfume? Because they're ugly...and they smell bad.
My life completely changed after I learned Morse Code Last night, for example, I couldn't fall asleep because the rain kept telling me to go fuck myself.
Why did Uber CEO Travis Kalanick quit the Trump advisory council? He couldn't get a ride...
Knock, knock. -Who's there?

-The doctor!

-Doctor who?

-Yes, that's me!
A Jewish military man from Israel told me this joke. Deep in the desert. Mehmet, an Arab fighter (or militant, if you will) chases an Israeli soldier, let's call him Moshe, with an AK47 gun.

Mehmet closes on Moshe and starts firing at him but misses. The chase continues through the desert, there's quite a lot of firing from Mehmet and quite a lot of bullet dodging from Moshe. 

At one point Mehmet's gun refuses to fire - Mehmet's out of ammunition.

Moshe hears the clicking of the empty gun, turns triumphantly to Mehmet and says: "Out of bullets, huh? Wanna buy some?"
A priest asks a custodian to watch the confessional booth while he takes a piss.. While the custodian is quietly waiting, a beautiful, long-legged blonde walks into the booth. She says "Father forgive me for I have sinned it has been 1 month since my last confession, and I have given a blowjob!" The janitor isn't sure what the priest would tell her to do so he pops his head out to ask the altar boy "hey, what do you get for a blowjob!?" The altar boy replies "usually a soda and a candy bar."
I read an article that said it's good for your eyesight to look at something distant occasionally during computer use. So I put a picture of my dad next to the monitor. 
What did one tampon say to the other? Nothing, they're both stuck up cunts.
A feminist asked me how I view lesbians... ... apparently in HD wasn't the correct answer.
Had a great time protesting at UC Berkeley! It was a riot!
Why are married women heavier than single women? When single women get home, they settle in, take a peek at what's in the fridge, and head for bed. When married women get home, they settle in, take a peek at what's in bed, and head for the fridge.
Complaint from 3017: These children's long-term zero gravity soccer leagues are raising weak adults. Every kid gets atrophy.
A Jewish military man from Israel told me this joke. Deep in the desert. Mehmet, an Arabic fighter (Or militant, if you will) with an AK47 handgun is chasing a lone Israeli soldier, let's call him Mosche. 

Mehmet closes on Mosche and starts firing at him but misses. The chase continues, there is quite a lot of firing from Mehmet and quite a lot of bullet dodging from Mosche.

At one point Mehmet tries to fire again only to realise he's out of ammunition.

Mosche turns to Mehmet triumphantly, looks him squarely in the eye, and says: "I got some bullets in the bag. Wanna buy?"
Told This By A Coworker A While Back Long Btw A man gets home absolutely hammered at 3:00 p.m on a Tuesday and goes up to his wife and says, "I wanna 69 right now".
The wife goes "Uhmm, sure". 
So they get into it and about 20min later there's a knock at the door, so the guy gets a pair of pants on and goes and answers the door. At the door is Johnny the paper boy, and when Johnny sees the guy he starts to laugh really friggin' hard. 
So the guy goes "What? What's funny?" 
And Johnny points at his upper lip, so the guy reaches up and wipes his lip, and sees a smear of red on his hand, the guy immediately goes "Oh no, it's not what you think, I was just in the kitchen eating a Jelly sandwich."
And Johnny replies "I'm not laughing about the Jelly on your lip, I'm laughing about the peanut butter in your hair."



Tried going to the obesity clinic before work today. But the queue was enormous. 
Have you heard the old one about a woman doing a survey on sexual attitudes? She stops an airline pilot and asks him, amongst other things, when he last had sexual intercourse. He replies 1958. Now, knowing airline pilots, the researcher is surprised and queries this. Well, says the pilot, it's only 2110 now.

(Credit, John Cleese c. 1991)
When I first met my son I thought he was a whiny little baby. But he grew on me.
The husband asks the wife... The husband asks the wife:
-Babe which do you like the best, strawberry or banana? 
The wife asks him:
-Why are you at the Supermarket?
The husband replys:
No I'm at the pharmacy...
So I almost talked my way out of a speeding ticket by telling the women officer she looked stunning.. Then I fucked up by telling her "and that's not even the drinks talking".
One big happy family. My wife and I got married last summer, we were together since we were teens, she was the only person that wanted to be with me, and she was the only one I wanted to be with, other than my best friend ofcource , he’s the only other one I’d spend my time with, and it helped that my friend and my then girlfriend ( now wife ) got along very well, in fact she hung out with me because she thought my friend was cute initially ( that’s what she said ( no pun intended, or detected ( parenthesis inception ) ) )

Today, I came home early from a business trip, I did not tell my wife about it, I wanted it to be a secret, I did not tell anyone about it. I wanted to surprise her, I wanted her to know that I cared about her and that I will and will always be there for her … the thing is my wife had nightmares about me being unalive and that she’d be a widow and the only person by her side at my funeral was my friend. 

I decided go to my best friends house, which a stones throw away from mine first, because I had the strangest gut feeling that he would be with my wife that night… Don’t get me wrong I love them both and I love the fact that they get along, but I just couldn’t get the thought out of my head, and when I went over to his … empty house, I had a moment of clarity. I was not mad, I was not angry, I was not enraged, in fact, it was all a seiner blob of thought. All  those times when he’d as us to have dinner together and I’d be the only one who’d say “no”, all those time my wife said he was a cute… 

At this moment, I felt … happy . I was glad , I couldn’t believe myself. I was glad that my best friend cared this deeply about my wife, and I was glad that my wife loved my best friend this much, I was incredebally happy !!  I could now surprise them together in my own bed room !! As I unlocked my house doors, I was careful not to make a sound and wake them up, and as I walked closer to my bed room, I saw two plates in the dining area, and I opened my bed room door as slowly as I could.

I was correct … My best friend was sleeping in the warm embrace of my wife, and it was so … cute, but as I took another step, the floor board creaked and my friend who had a keen ear looked around and saw me. For a moment he did not know what to do, but the very next he jolted towards me; and in the process woke my wife up. When he got close enough, he put his hands on my chest and stared kissing my all over my face, and my wife looked sheepishly at us and fell onto the bed cheekily whilst opening her arms for a hug and said “ I missed you ... “. 

I kissed my friend and went over to my wife and said, “ You know, I knew that you’d be with him, and I love the both of you for that”, while hugging her. My best friend joined in on the hug and I decided at that moment that he’d move in with us and would have dinner with us every night. He was now **our** best friend and the good-est boy we have ever known. We were one big happy family...

tl;dr: The devil is in the detail.

A farmer buys a young rooster As soon as it comes home, it screws all the 153 hens... 
The farmer is impressed thinking about the eggs the hens would hatch. At lunch, the young energetic rooster again screws all the 153 hens. 

The farmer got tensed up now. Next day, he finds the rooster screwing the ducks & the geese and parrot too which scared the hell out of him. Later that day, the farmer finds the rooster lying pale, half-dead & vultures circling overhead.

Farmer says "You deserved it, you Hot little bastard! you deserve this "The rooster opens one eye, points up & says "Ssshhh. Let them land, I've never screwed a vulture in my whole career".....
Oh Darling... Oh darling, since you’ve started dieting, you’ve become such a passionate kisser…

What do you mean, passionate? I’m looking for food remains!
I just ended a 5 year relationship today. It's okay. It wasn't my relationship. 
Jesus Christ goes up to heaven... He walks up  an old man and says "Excuse me but I'm looking for my father. 

The old man says "That's funny! I'm looking for my son!"

Jesus says "Well, actually, my father isn't really my father".

The old man says "That's funny! My son isn't really my son!"

Jesus says "My father was a carpenter".

The old man says "That's funny! I'M  a carpenter!!!"

Jesus throws his arms around the old man and say "Daaaaaad!"

The old many throws his arms around Jesus and says "Pinocchio!!!!"
Juan Pablo Robato walks into a pet store Juan Pablo goes to the front counter.

"Hola, my name is Juan Pablo Robato, and I am here to buy a pet. What kinds of animals do you sell here?"

"Well, we mostly sell dogs, or doggos as the kids on the internet say."

"Do you sell gatos?" Juan Pablo inquired.

"Yes we sell cats, put like I said, mostly dogs."

"Are there any other animals for sale?"

"No, we only have dogs and cats here."

Juan Pablo replied "So you're telling me, if I wanted to buy a pet here, I'd have to buy a- "

"Doggo or a gato, Mr. Robato."

"Ah. I see."
Retribution Jim had just gotten a new car and was out for a drive when he accidentally cut off a truck driver. Truck driver motioned for Jim to pull over.


When Jim did, the driver got out of his truck and pulled a piece of chalk from his pocket. He drew a circle on the side of the road and gruffly commanded to Jim, "Stand in that circle and DON'T MOVE!"


He then went to Jim's car and cut up its leather seats.


When he turned around, Jim had a slight grin on his face, so the driver said, "Oh you think that's funny? Watch this!"


He gets a bat out of his truck and breaks every window in Jim’s car. When he turns and looks at Jim, he has a smile on his face.


Driver is getting really mad. He gets his knife back out and slices all its tires.


Now Jim is laughing.


The truck driver is really starting to lose it. He goes back to his truck and gets a can of petrol, pours it on Jim’s car and sets it on fire.


He turns around and Jim is laughing so hard he is about to fall down.


"What's so funny?" the truck driver asked.


Jim replied, "Every time you weren't looking, I stepped outside the circle!!" 

My roommate was a monster He said he hated me with every inch of his soul. He would take ants and put them on my face and clothes. I did nothing whatsoever at him. I've since left that room, but I wished he didn't antagonize me that much.
A wife treats her husband by taking him to a strip club for his birthday. At the club, the doorman says, "Hi Jim, how are you?"

The wife asks, "How does he know you?"

Jim says, "Oh dear, I play football with him."

Inside the Bartender Says, "The Usual, Jim?"

Jim says to Wife, "Before you say anything, He's on the Darts team."

Next a stripper Says, "Hi Jim! Do you crave the special again?"

The Wife storms out dragging Jim with her & jumps into a taxi. The Taxi driver Says, "Hey Jimmy boy! You picked up an ugly one this time..."



Jim's Funeral is on Sunday!!!
I couldn't be happier! For the first time in my life a girl told me she loves me. Aren't moms great? 
The Raise!! Sam walks into his boss’s office and says “Sir, I’ll be straight with you, I know the economy isn’t great, but I have over three companies after me, and I would like to respectfully ask for a raise.”

After a few minutes of haggling, the boss finally agrees to a 5% raise, and Sam happily gets up to leave. “By the way,” asks the boss, “Which three companies are after you?”

“The electric company, water company, and the phone company!”
Why are malay people so thin? Because they muslim.
What turns a fruit into a vegetable? Aids. 
What's "meme" in French? Moimoi.
I need help I have a problem of creating topics just for the sake of delivering some lame ass punchline or a pun even if the topic itself is moot, and I need professional help with that.

It just happens like one-two and that's that. 
It confuses me why people feel comfortable with government surveillance as “they have nothing to hide, so nothing to fear”.... ….but get really scared when I ask them to take their clothes off.
I'm so embarrassed, I got caught getting a blow job by my mum last week.. The worst thing is it was my dad who caught us
The trump family is flying from New York to DC Donald looks down on the cities below and says "I think I'll throw a 1000$ bill out of the window and make some american happy. Melanie says "Oh honey why not throw 10 100$ bills and make 10 americans happy?" 
So then Ivanka says "Even better daddy, throw 100 ten dollar bills out of the window and make 100 americans happy?" To that the pilot says " Why dont you all jump out the window and make the whole country happy?" 

EDIT: Thank you for the gold!! 
I found a genie lamp and it turned out to be an "animal" genie I rubbed the strange looking lamp with excitement and the genie proptly came out.

Me: "this is great! So, do i get three wishes?"

Genie: "no sir, i am a special kind of genie, an animal genie, i can grant you the wish to turn you into any animal you'd like. Any animal, just name it."

Me: "well i wasn't expecting this, but dog, definitely dog!"

Genie: "really? A dog? I mean, you could be any majestic creature that you want. You could be a formidable rhinoceros or a mighty eagle and soar the skies looking for prey. Maybe even a whale, a dolphin, a fearsome shark, so many options to choose from."

Me: "Okay, Do any of those like their own dick and balls?"

Genie: "uhh.. no I don't think so"

Me: "dog it is!

edit: formatting
Paddy and Mick walk past a police station.... Paddy and Mick walk past a police station, with a sign up saying "Two Brazilian men wanted for rape". Paddy turns to Mick and says "Ah Jaysus, dem fuckers always get the best jobs."
I like my women like I like my coffee... Hot and all over my lap while I'm driving.
Aladdin sings to Jasmine "I can show you the woorld..
Except the United States"
What's a young dog's favourite type of pizza? pupperoni
I like my jokes how I like my laundry Dry.
Vegetable rationing Some supermarkets are rationing lettuce, I think this is just the tip of the iceberg...
Your Mother... - Yo mama is hairy, she shaves her legs with a weed wacker.
- Yo mama is so fat, when she jumped in the air she got stuck. 
- Yo mama is so stupid, she tripped over a cordless phone.
- Yo mama is so poor, when came over I stepped on a cigarette butt she said "who turned off the heat".
- Yo mama is so fat when I walked around her I got lost.
- Yo mama is so fat and stupid, when I said it was chilly out, she ran outside with a bowl.
- Yo mama is so dumb she tried to drown a fish. 
- Yo mama is ugly, when she goes shopping they ask *her* for a bag.
- Yo mama is so ugly, she got fired from the zoo.  
- You mama is so fat, when she jumped in front of my car, I swerved and ran out of gas.  

Happy Mothers day everybody!
After many years of philosophizing, I have decided to affirm the principle of non-contradiction... ...And deny it. 
How is the bar at the ghost wedding set up? Boo's on the left,
Spirit's on the right
At the watering hole, an elephant suddenly picked up a tortoise and flung it as far away as he could. A lion asked, "Why'd you do that?" The elephant said, "That's the same one that bit me on the trunk 17 years ago last week." The lion said, "Wow. Amazing memory." The elephant said, "Sure. Turtle recall."
I had a problem with my computer yesterday... So I called Eric, the 11 year old next door, whose bedroom looks like Mission Control and asked him to come over.

Eric clicked a couple of buttons and solved the problem.

As he was walking away, I called after him, 'So, what was wrong ?
He replied, 'It was an ID ten T error.'

 I didn't want to appear stupid, but nonetheless inquired,


'An, ID ten T error ? What's that? In case I need to fix it again.'


Eric grinned .... 'Haven't you ever heard of an ID ten T error before ?


'No,' I replied.


'Write it down,' he said, 'and I think you'll figure it out.'
So I wrote down:


ID10T


I used to like Eric, the little bastard.
What does Scrabble and a circle jerk have in common? It's a great way for a family to come together. 
My friend just got an Amazon Echo. I said, "Alexa, hi, how are y--" She said, "I have a boyfriend."
wanna read a dirty joke... ;) a white horse ran through  a muddy puddle 
Turns out I'm allergic to alcohol ...It's the damnedest thing. After 12 or 13 beers, I throw up!
What currency do they use in outer space? Starbucks. 
Ghost walks into a bar Bartender says sorry we don't serve spirits here.
Preston: Knock Knock! Mom: Who's There

Preston: Preston. 

Mom: Preston who?

Preston let out a disheartening sigh as he walked away from the door, knowing his mother's Alzheimer's was getting worse. 
According to the psychiatrists who studied him, Josef Fritzl is an immature, violently angry and sexually perverted man who had an unhappy childhood and as a consequence behaves in a highly controlling way to everyone around him. I can't help feeling that a lot of heartache could have been avoided if he had done the usual thing and become a PE teacher.
I can say I'm one of those prodigy geniuses who just don't have any enthusiasm. All I need now is to be a genius.
Not quite what she was expecting... Guy: I work with animals every day!

Girl: That's so sweet! Are you a vet or a pet shop own-

Guy: I'm a butcher.
A John Picks up a Hooker.. A John picks up a hooker. They're on their way to the motel when she just can't stop talking about how awesome her pussy is. They get to the room. She takes off her clothes. She says to the guy, "Put a finger in." He does. "Put two fingers in." He does. "Put four fingers in." He does. "Put your hand in." He does. "Put your other hand in." He does. "Now, clap." He says " I can't." She says, "Tight, isn't it?"
Older couple   An older couple is spending time up in the bedroom before turning in for the night. Hubby's reading the paper while his wife is checking herself out in the mirror. Every few minutes, she lets out with a little- "Ooooh!" and "Awww!"
 Finally, the husband can't concentrate and puts the paper down.
 "Whaaaat? What the hell is going on with you over there?"
 "Tsk... it's just that every time I look in the mirror lately, all I see is that I'm getting older and fatter and uglier every day!", she says, pouting. "I could really use a compliment right now."
 The husband looks her up and down and says- "Well, there's absolutely nothing wrong with your eyesight!"
What Do You Call a Twitchy Boat at the Bottom of the Sea? A nervous wreck.
What's the difference between the show Jackass and CNN news? Suits

Recently I visited my daughter. When I asked her newspaper, she said: Dad, this is the 21st century, take my IPad. What can I say ... this fly did not know what killed her.
A joke for Donald Trump - what do you get when you cross Queen Elizabeth and Prince Charles? Killed in a tunnel
A priest was driving along... ... and saw a nun on the side of the road; he stopped and offered her a lift which she gladly accepted. 

She got in and crossed her legs, forcing her gown to open and reveal a lovely leg. 

The priest had a look and nearly had an accident. After controlling the car, he stealthily slid his hand up her leg.

The nun looked at him and immediately said, "Father, remember psalm 129?" 

The priest was flustered and apologized profusely. He forced himself to remove his hand. However, he was unable to remove his eyes from her leg. 

Further on, while changing gear, he let his hand slide up her leg again.

The nun once again said, "Father, remember psalm 129?" Once again the priest apologized. "Sorry sister, but the mind is weak." 

Arriving at the convent, the nun got out, gave him a meaningful glance and went on her way.
 
On his arrival at the church, the priest rushed to retrieve a bible and looked up psalm 129. 

It Said, "Go forth and seek; further up, you will find glory." 

Why do tampons have strings attached to them? So the crabs can go bungee jumping.
What do you call the winner of the beauty pageant for teenagers who've had an abortion? Little miss conception 
What did the gangster's son tell his dad when he failed his exams? "Dad, they questioned me for 3 hours,

but I never told them anything!"

I know of a guy who fucked millions of people at a time It was a whole nation he did this to.
His name is Donald Trump.
I learned out that my wife loves cocktails I told her that it's growing your pubes in one direction and no one does that
What's the difference..... Between and suicide vest and a modern feminist?

At least the vest achieves something when it's triggered.
3 surgeons walk into a pub... ...The first claims to be the best surgeon of Texas: "the world's best piano player lost 7 fingers in an accident. I sewed them back on and yesterday, he played a private concert for the queen of England."

The second one answeres: "That's nothing. A young man lost both arms and both legs in an accident and I sewed them back on. 2 years later, he won a gold medal at the olympic games." 

The third physician, who had been silent to this point says: "Amateurs! A couple of years ago, a young businessman overdosed on coke. He rode his horse in front of a train, tried to stop the train and was ripped into pieces. The only thing left was the man's butt and the horses forelock. I patched him up and two weeks ago, this man was sworn in as President of the United States.
What's the first amendment in Super Mario's constitution? Freedom of Peach
John dies due to a car accident In heaven, he sees a wall of very large clocks.

He asks the Angel "What up with all these clocks?"

Angel answers "These clocks measure lies, every person has one clock assigned to them. Whenever you lie on earth, the clock ticks."

The man points towards a clock and asks, "Who's clock does this belong to?"

Angel answers 'This clock belongs to Mother Teresa. She has never told a lie, so it hasn't moved."

John walks around and sees all sorts of clocks with different times on them.

He reaches a room having clocks of the presidents. He notices that it doesn't have Trump's clock.

So he asks "Where is Trump's clock?"

The Angel replies "That one is in our office, we use it as a table fan."
Fart Football An old married couple no sooner hit the pillows when the old man passes gas and says,"Seven Points." His wife rolls over and says, "What in the world was that?" The old man replied, "It's fart football."
A few minutes later his wife lets one go and says "Touchdown, tie score." After about five minutes the old man lets another one go and says, "Aha. I'm ahead 14 to 7." Not to be outdone the wife rips out another one and says, "Touchdown, tie score."
Five seconds go by and she lets out a little squeaker and says, "Field goal, I lead 17 to 14." Now the pressure is on the old man. He refuses to get beaten by his wife, so he strains real hard. Since defeat is totally unacceptable, he gives it everything he's got, and accidentally poops the bed..The wife says, "What the heck was that?" The old man says, 'Half time, switch sides"
Groundhog Day is a classic. It sure has great replay value.
A man walks in to a hospital And says to the doctor "I have five penises". The doctor asked him how his pants fitted. "Like a glove" he replied.
I may look like a joke to you.... ...but I'm completely dad inside
If the dove is the bird of peace, what is the bird of true love? The swallow
I don't see anything wrong with the KKK It's just the precursor to 4K TV
Why did the cartographer get kicked out of map making club He had a bad latitude
My friend liked puns too much. We called him a Pundit.
So a Nazi officer just lost his eyesight. I guess he can Nazi anymore.
I apologize for all those things I said and did... I was on a lot of drugs back then. Doctor siad it wasn't enough, so he gave me more drugs. Now I'm better.

What do you call a snowman who trades sex for money? A Frostitute. 
I was afraid that I had stepped on my child's hamster this morning... ... but laughed when I double checked.  I had just tripped on a little puddle of blood and fur.
Evolutionists found the first humans were a Jewish male, a Georgian male and a Russian female... Their names were Arron Gutan, Chimpanidze and Gavrila...
How does Hitler sneeze? **a-jew* *
What's the difference between an underpowered motorbike and an overused vagina? One's a laggy scooter, and the other's a slaggy cooter!
How does Perry the pea pod greet his mate Kevin the corn kernel? Morn'in cob. 
I don't understand why they say ignorance is bliss Trump supporters always seem so unhappy and angry 
What's a carrot's favorite type of dancing? Tap root dancing.
What is a 14 year old with two broken arms favorite piece of clothing? Oedipal underwear 
What's the best part about dating a homeless man? You can drop him off anywhere
Being buried... Friend 1: What scares you the most?

Friend 2: Being buried...

Friend 1: Why?

Friend 2: I don't want to talk about it, the thought of it scares me to death.
What's the favorite sex position of Git users? Revert cowgirl.
What's the best thing about an Oprah Winfrey joke? You get the joke! You get the joke! You all get the joke! 
Ducks Three wisemen die and go to heaven for their good deeds. When they arrived at the gates, an Angel greets them and explains the rules, "Under no circumstances are you to step on a duck". And throwing the gates open the wisemen see ducks as far as the eye could see.

The first wiseman goes a week and steps on a duck. The Angel appears and says "Follow me". So the Angel leads him down a long dark hallway to a room with the ugliest creature he'd ever laid eyes on, "This is your spouse for eternity" says the Angel, locking him in and leaving.

A month goes by and the second wiseman steps on a duck, the Angel appears and takes him down the long dark hallway to a room with the ugliest creature he's ever seen, tells him that's his spouse now, locks him in and leaves.

The last wiseman goes a whole year and doesn't step on a duck, but the Angel appears anyway and tells him to follow. They walk down a long dark hallway to a room with the most beautiful woman he'd ever seen. "Is this my reward for not stepping on ducks?" The Angel smiles, "No, she stepped on a duck"

Also while typing this I farted so hard I woke up my wife
Mall Security pick up a lost boy... Mall Security pick up a lost boy at the shopping center.

The Mall cop asks, "Who were you with?"

The little boy answers, "My Granddad."

The Mall cop asks, "What's he like?"

The little boy thinks for a moment and replies, "Whisky and women with big tits."
The bartender says, “We don’t serve time travelers in here.” A time traveler walks into a bar...
What do you call a gay black man? A homiesexual.
So I replaced all of the incense in the Friar's chamber with Marijuana He's a High priest now
I got a new radio system in my car the other day. The thing is great, you shout Soul, and it plays Soul. You should Rock, it starts playing Rock.

The other day, some kids ran past my car, and I shouted, "FUCKING KIDS!" and it started playing Micheal Jackson.
Why was the blind Mexican only saying "no"? Because he couldn't Si
My Asian friend got his Jewish wife pregnant. I guess "Cha Ching" wasn't an appropriate name suggestion 
A couple were at a divorce court just a month after getting married The judge asked the wife " Why you want divorce so soon?"

Wife: " He has a problem with premature ejaculation."

Husband " I'm totally fine with that, its she who finds it a problem"
Trump never eats russian salad... He knows what Vladmir Putin it.
I had a company that sold miniature bibles that would fit in your wallet, but if failed. The margins were too small. 
What do you call a Mormon at a rave? An LDS on LSD
A husband and wife were preparing for a night of wild sex.. When suddenly, before it happened the husband died.

The wife was devastated and left unsatisfied. She decided to cut off his penis and keep it to pleasure herself, and she stuck it on a wall, and used it almost daily.

Somehow, a neighbor found out about it, removed the penis, put a hole in the wall and stuck his own in there. When the wife got home that day, she walked up to the wall with a knife and said 'honey, we're moving houses.'

Why did the mermaid wear seashells? Because the B shells were too small and the D shells were too big.
A Grasshopper walked into a bar.... A grasshopper walks into a bar and orders a beer. As the bartender sets the beer down in front of the grasshopper, he remarks,

"You know, we have a cocktail named after you."

The grasshopper looks surprised. "What? You have a cocktail called a Kevin?"
So these three friends went to a park to enjoy their Sunday. [Warning: graphic content]

Jim, Tim and Maximilian found a place near a tree to settle down and lay out their stuff. They'd been through a hectic week and they deserved this break, particularly Tim, who had been through the most.

So they pulled out their drinks and lay it on the mat, and set up their radio to play some relaxing music. Jim got out the fruits he brought, and Maximilian carefully took out his lasagna while the three were engaging in small talk. "Beautiful day, right Tim?" said Jim, as Tim murmured a soft yes while frantically searching in his giant bag. Maximilian noticed something was wrong, and asked "What's the matter, Tim?" Tim said, "I made six Cubanos this morning, I see only two." Maximilian responded, "Don't worry, we can manage with two and what we've got here." Tim anxiously said, "No you don't understand, I spent an awful lot of time learning how to make these and spent the whole night yesterday and morning today so I could get these right." Jim: "Tim, you've been through a lot this week, you should've taken some rest instead. Take a seat, no worries we'll share."

"Shut the fuck up," came the blunt response from Tim as he almost dove into his bag desperately trying to find his remaining four Cubanos. A concerned Maximilian commented, "This guy really needs to chill, he's taking this way too seriously." Tim snapped, and he jumped on Maximilian and brutally beat him up, before stepping on his face until he was bleeding profusely and unable to move. A shocked Jim took two steps back before charging at Tim, who tackled him and immediately threw him to the ground and delivered some hard punches to Jim's stomach before smashing a glass bottle on his head, leaving him unconscious. Just as Maximilian recovered, Tim held him to the tree and stabbed him with the broken glass bottle. Maximilian slumped as Tim watched both of them, standing in his bloodied t-shirt and panting heavily.

A bystander nearby saw all of this and said to his friend: "It looks like that guy was a few sandwiches short of a picnic."
Why can't you trust atoms? Because they make up everything.
Why do all gay men sound the same? Because they are Homonyms
Giving birth isn't as painful as being kicked in the nuts I've never heard a man say 'let's do that again' afterwards
A new exchange student from Spain came into our class. We made fun of his accent at first, but it quickly became clear he was incredibly intelligent. Everyone was surprised.

No one expected the Spanish erudition.
Call a girl beautiful 1,000 times and she'll never notice. Call a girl fat once and she'll never forget it. Because elephants never forget.
Why aren't Alpacas good in the porn idustry? Because spitters are quitters 
Just left an interview and they told me there'd be a drug test. I'm not worried, though. I know a lot about drugs, so it should be a pretty easy test.
Engineers and Lawyers Three lawyers are buying tickets for a train to Chicago. Ahead of them in line, three engineers purchase a single ticket.

One of the lawyers asks, "How are you going to travel with just a ticket between the three of you?"

"Watch and you'll see," winks one of the engineers.

The train arrives, and the six of them climb on. The three lawyers take their seats while the three engineers pile into a bathroom. The train gets underway.

A conductor starts making his rounds. Noticing the bathroom is occupied, he knocks on the door and asks, "Ticket, please."

The door cracks open a hair, and a single ticket is offered. The conductor punches it, and continues on.

The three lawyers admit that this is a good trick, and that they should try it on their next journey. As luck would have it, after spending a few days in Chicago, they see that the three engineers will be on board their train. The lawyers purchase a single ticket for the three of them, while the engineers don't buy a ticket at all.

One of the lawyers asks, "How are you going to ride, if you don't have a ticket?"

"Watch and you'll see," came the reply.

The lawyers get on the train, and scramble into a bathroom. The engineers cram themselves into an adjacent bathroom. The train leaves, and picks up speed. One of the engineers gets out of the bathroom, walks over to the lawyers' bathroom, and knocks.

"Ticket, please."
KGB Agents Two KGB Agents talk:

 -   What happened to him?
 -   He ate bad mushrooms
 -   Why are there beating marks on the body?
 -   He didn't want to eat them


Had a job interview today I was in a job interview today. The interviewing manager handed me his laptop and said, "I want you to try and sell this to me." So I put the laptop under my arm, walked out of the building, and went home.

Eventually he called my mobile and said, "Bring it back here right now!"

I said, "$200 and it's yours."


Didn't get the job btw...
What did the stoner name his daughter? Mary Joanna
A Crayola truck just got robbed for profit We're currently searching for the purple traders
The U.S., the U.K, Germany and France all start a new game of Dungeons and Dragons in 2017. What's the first action the U.S. makes? A Constitution saving throw.


I didn't know whether to use ser or estar.... I didn't expect the Spanish indecision 
What did the college student call noodles in a kettle? Spaghe-tea,
and crippling tuition costs mixed with overpriced parking fees and the text book industry scam charging him 150 fucking dollars for an edition that is just two words longer than the previous one.

#NotMyGroundhog Cold weather triggers me
What do you call a loud, mentally disabled dog? A sub-ruffer. 
Did you hear about the woman who backed into an airplane? Disaster.
What do you get when you mix sodium hydroxide with hydrochloric acid? Water, and /r/leagueoflegends
Two Jewish brothers are walking down the street. They pass a Protestant church whose sign read "Convert to Christianity, Receive $2000". One of the brothers said "I'm going in there to check this out" His brother says "You can't possibly be thinking about converting to Christianity! This is your people this is your heritage!" his brother says "No no, I'm just going to see why they're doing it" After two hours he comes out of the church and says to his brother "I have converted to Christianity, I believe that Jesus is the true lord and savior of humanity and that he will return to earth to bless us and take us to heaven for an eternity of everlasting bliss". His brother says "Well what about the $2000?"

He says "What is it with you people and money?"
When a girl sleeps around, she gets called easy... But when **I** do it, all I get is crabs. 
Trump has been looking smaller and smaller lately. He's on the low-fact diet. 
Have you heard the joke about the man with a micropenis? He had a micropenis. That's the joke. Short, isn't it?
One afternoon a lawyer was riding in his limousine... when he saw two men along the road-side eating grass.
 
Disturbed, he ordered his driver to stop and got out to investigate.
 
He asked one man, "Why are you eating grass?"
 
"We don't have any money for food," the poor man replied. "We have to eat grass."
 
"Well, then, you can come with me to my  house and I'll feed you," the lawyer said.
 
"But sir, I have a wife and two children with  me. They are over there, under that tree."
 
"Bring them along," the lawyer replied.
 
Turning to the other poor man he stated, "You may come with us, also."

The second man, in a pitiful voice, then said, "But sir, I also have a wife and SIX children with me!"
 
"Bring them all as well," the lawyer answered.
 
They all entered the car, which was no easy task, even for a car as large as the limousine was.
 
Once under way, one of the poor fellows turned to the lawyer and said, "Sir, you are too kind."

"Thank you for taking all of us with you.
 
The lawyer replied, "Glad to do it. You'll really love my place. The grass is almost a foot high."
A lesbian goes to the gynaecologist... He shines his pen torch and has a decent look "Crikey, it's extremely clean in here, Mrs", she smiles and replies "It bloody well should be. I get a woman in three times a week"
I went to see Don Quixote at the theater yesterday and there was a short break in the middle of the play. We didn't know it would happen, no one expected the Spanish intermission.
How to make scrambled eggs Step 1: Find omelette recipe

Step 2: Follow omelette recipe until folding step

Step 3: Try to fold the omelette in the pan

Step 4: Fuck it up because how the fuck do you even do that

Step 5: Enjoy scrambled eggs
I knew an Indian who drank so much tea that he died in his tea pee
A group of 5 guys were sitting around and talking. A group of 5 guys were sitting around and talking.

Guy #1: People who date both guys and girls are gross. They are terrible people.

Guy #2: Yeah, none of them are good.

Guy #3: If there is anyone here that thinks they arent the worst, you can leave.

Guy #4: Wow you look mad, Guy #5, are you one of those bad gay types? 

Guy #5, walking out the door: No, good bi.
Wow, Donald Trump is President. I haven't seen Democrats this mad since.... ...slavery was outlawed and the desegregation of public schools!
I'm not addicted to cocaine I just like the way it smells. 
Four professionals are interviewing for a math-intensive position in a company The shortlist of applicants includes a mathematician, a physicist, an engineer, and an accountant.

To begin each interview, the representative from HR poses a simple math problem to warm up the candidates. What is 45+18?

The mathematician immediately responds "63".

The physicist responds "63, plus or minus 10%".

The engineer thinks for a moment and responds "63, but for safety, let's call it 70".

The accountant shuts the door, checks over his shoulder, leans in close to the desk, and whispers "*how much do you want it to be?*"
What's the difference between a rock musician and a jazz musician? A rock musician plays 3 chords for 20,000 people, and a jazz musician plays 20,000 chords for 3 people
What's green and fuzzy and if it falls out of a tree it will kill you? A pool table. 
What's the difference between John Wayne and Jack Daniels? Jack Daniels is still killing Indians.
Why does Helen Keller masturbate with one hand? So she can moan with the other!
Why do Jewish people have circumcised penises? Because they're 20% off
What do you call a Muslim walrus? A halalrus
(read in vampire voice) Do you know what is ironic about a vampire penis? You, suck it. 
What's the best way to run Meincraft on a Windows computer? By using DOS-Fuhrer
A bartender says "Hey! We don't serve faster-than-light particles here!" A tachyon flies into a bar.
How do farmers get the party started? They turnip the beets.
What do you call a piece of corn all by itself? A Unicorn.
Puxatony Phil has seen his shadow... burned permanetly into a stone wall. He's predicted a nuclear winter. 
What did Neil Gorsuch say when asked why he ruled against Roe v Wade? Not my precedent
An older couple is driving down the highway... An older couple is driving down the highway when they get pulled over by a State Trooper. The cop walks up to the driver side window and asks, "Do you know how fast you were going?" And from the passenger's side, he hears  a woman yell, "WWHHAAAAAT?!?" The driver turns to her and shouts, "HE WANTS TO KNOW HOW FAST WE WERE GOING!!!" Turning back to the cop, the old man says, "Sorry about that officer. My wife is pretty hard of hearing. And if we were driving a little too fast, I apologize and promise to slow it down." The cop says, "Uh huh. And where abouts are you folks headed?"
And again, "WWHHAAAAATT?!?!"
"HE WANTS TO KNOW WHERE WE'RE GOING!! I'm sorry, Officer.... Uh, Michigan. We're on our way to see our Grandson."
And the cop says, "Michigan, huh? Yeah, I used to know a gal up in Michigan. Worst sex I ever had."
The old lady yells, "WWHHHAAAAATT?!?!" and her husband turns to her and shouts, "HE SAYS HE THINKS HE KNOWS YOU!!"
I hate grammar Nazis But I love the alt-write. 

I'll be here until I start yesterday's hw
Saw a midget carrying a television the other day I asked him if he need any help carrying the television. 

He told me to fuck off and said its an ipad.
I really don't like punchlines They hurt.
What do you call a female to male surgery? addadicktome
It's rude to call someone a fob You just assumed they understand English
How do jews celebrate Christmas? By installing a parking meter on the roof.
What do you call a snobbish criminal going down the stairs? A condescending con descending