Darth Vader showed up to Luke's party uninvited. Talk about a foe pa.
They call me the microwave... Cause i take it out 2 seconds before i finish.
They say that every 2 out of 3 people live next to a pedophile Not me though, I live with one.
The dumbest joke I know of... You.
Three math teachers are talking about their favorite kinds of angles The first one says, "I like right angles, they are the easiest to work with", The second teacher says " I prefer acute angles", The last teacher says,"I don't care what kind of angles they are as long as they are not 180." *If you know what i mean.*
My son told me that he had something to say. "What is it, boy?" I asked.

"Dad..." he said. "Is it OK if I invite my date over for dinner?"

"That's fine," I smiled. "as long as she isn't black!"

He said, "Don't worry. He isn't."
Why would Drake make a good Dothraki? He's from Degrassi.
The Lone Ranger finds Tonto lying in the desert with his ear pressed to the ground. "What is it Tonto?" asked the Lone Ranger, knowing full well of his partner's sensory capabilities.

Tonto opens his eyes softly and stares into the horizon, with his ear still flat on the ground.

"Five men.... on three horses.... all armed...." he says.

The Lone Ranger is impressed, "that's amazing Tonto, how do you know that they're all armed?"

"Ran me over."
I would make a sarcastic comment about North Korea... ... but it's been banned.
The last time I saw my friend Peter he was counting. "75, 76, 77..." he said, as he began to walk away. I don't know what he's up to now. 
Trump finally delivers an apology "I used to be a jerk, for which I apologize.

I still am, but I used to be one too."
Women are natural born artist. From drawing eyebrows to drawing conclusions
What do you call a woodpecker without a beak? A headbanger.
What is long, hard and has cum in it.....? A cucumber
Do you know why you need two fingers for a rectal exam? For a second opinion...
I always wear a helmet during intercourse cause I'm a firm believer in safe sex. Doesn't help much against the STD's but it sure is effective against the pepper-spray.
What's the definition of a will? Come on, it's a dead giveaway!
Three Dumb ER Stories You’re Allowed To Laugh At “Patient in to ER at 0400 with no complaints: ‘I have been having chest pain for 4 months but I am not having chest pain now. The reason I’m here now is because I heard that 4am is the best time to come cause there are not that many people.’ ”

“Had a woman call 911 because she ‘had déjà vu in the shower and got nervous.’”

“Got a frantic call from a woman who claimed she had overdosed and needed help immediately. We arrive on scene, and she hands us an empty mint container, saying she took them all. That night she learned that you cannot overdose on mints.”
I searched in Google "How do I know if my wife is a witch". You could've just asked me! - she yelled from the kitchen.
This year's Feline Rear of the Year award ceremony went horribly wrong It was a cat ass trophy
A man and his wife are at a golf resort... He tries to teach his wife how to swing a club 
"I already know how to hit a ball, watch this" she replies. She takes a big swing and hits the ball, the ball soars in the air and goes through a window of a mansion which happens to be at the resort. "Shit, we have to go apologize" says the husband. The wife agrees and they both decide to go to the mansion. As they find themselves at the front door the husband decides to knock on the door, as he knocks the door creepingly opens up slowly. "Should we go in? Doesn't look like anyone's here" says the wife. The husband says "yes let's go in and retrieve the golf ball and pretend it wasn't us that broke the window." They go inside looking at room after room until they find the room with the broken window, golf ball on the floor and knocked over lamp. The husband decides to pick up the lamp and out of no where a genie appears. The husband and wife are both shocked but the genie says "don't be scared, you have saved me, I was stuck in this lamp for centuries, I will offer you both a wish, any wish you would like but there is one request I have." The husband says what is that request? The genie responds and says "I get to have one wish of my own after I have granted your wishes." 
The wife says "OK no problem, my wish is that I have 10 million dollars" the genie snaps his fingers and says 10 million dollars is in your account. The husband says I want a Ferrari and Lamborghini, the genie snaps his fingers and says as soon as you go outside you'll see your cars. Both of them are so excited and then the genie interrupts and says "now it's time for my wish, I wish to have sex with your wife. The husband says "No way" but the wife agrees to it and says we will get our wishes if I do so and that there is no problem. The husband agrees and the wife goes to another room with the genie. During sex the wife asks the genie "how old are you genie?" the genie responds by asking her how old her husband is. She says my husband is 40 years old. The genie replies, so your husband is 40 and still believes in genies?
What did the Egyptian say when he was about to pass gas? Tutankhamun. 
A joke about a guy's first day in prison, from the first joke book I ever owned. Jim arrives at the prison where he has to serve out his 10 year sentence. After the formalities involved in processing, he was shown to his cell, which he had to share with another inmate. Overwhelmed by the thought of spending the next ten years in this miserable place, he spends most of the day in bed staring at the ceiling.

At 10 PM, the guards conducted roll-call, locked all the cells, and turned off the lights. Jim tried to sleep, but couldn't. 

Around midnight, he was snapped our of his thoughts when someone in the cellblock yelled "TWELVE!". Then, there was the sound of laughter reverberating around the building. He looked over to his cellmate who was laughing as well. Jim was surprised, but didn't make much of it. 

A little later, there was a shout of "TWENTY NINE!"! Again, the inmates in the block started to hoot in delight. Jim was intrigued and asked his cellmate, who was doubled over laughing, just what the heck was going on with the numbers. 

"Well...", said Jim's cellmate, "...those numbers aren't random, man. The people in this block have been in here a long time, so long in fact, that we all know each other's jokes by heart. We numbered them so that they're easier to tell! You can shout out a number, and every inmate in this building will know what joke you're talking about!"

"You're pulling my leg!", said Jim. The cellmate chuckles and says, "No, I'm not, man! Look, I'll show you. Give me a number." 

Jim shrugs, "Fine... How about 85?". The cellmate goes to the bars of the cell and yells out "EIGHTY FIVE!". The whole block starts to howl out laughing. The cellmate looks at Jim and smirks. 

Jim is astonished. "Can I try?", he asks. The cellmate beckons him to have at it. 

Jim gets off his bed and goes over to the bars of the cell. "FIFTY THREE!", he yells. 

No laughs, only silence. The cellmate says, "Try again." 

"SIX!", Jim yells. Still no response. "What happened? Did I choose the wrong jokes?" 

Jim's cellmate sighs, pats him on the back and says, "It's not the jokes, buddy, you're just not telling them right."



Does one brick float? Do two bricks float? No, but tree does

Trying hard to help people lose weight But they keep finding it on the dollar menu.
Why don't you kill a hippo in a video game? It's hippo-critical.
WOMEN eh! Boob-jobs,

nose-jobs,

teeth bleaching,

tummy tucks,

liposuction,

colonic irrigation,

botox,

pierced ears,

pierced nipples,

pierced bellies,

pierced clits,

eyebrows plucked,

bikini wax,

armpits shaved,

legs waxed,

lips tattooed,

tits tattooed,

arms tattooed,

legs tattooed,

lengthy diets,

strenuous exercise. . . . . . . . 

and then they refuse to take it up the arse cause: ''It hurts!!!''
What's the difference between a gay man and a fridge? The fridge doesn't groan when you pull your meat out.
Roses are Red, Violets are Red My garden is on fire.
I Went to an Idina Menzel Performance Last night I went to an Idina Menzel Performance. She was astonishing, truly defied gravity. Then she got a little too carried away with her excessive swearing I just thought she had to let it go!
A man and a woman on Eurorail....... ......find themselves in the same sleeping carriage. After the initial embarrassment they both go to sleep, the man on the top bunk, the woman on the lower. 

In the middle of the night the man leans over, wakes the woman and says, "I'm sorry to bother you, but I'm awfully cold and I was wondering if you could possibly get me another blanket?" 

The woman leans out and, with a glint in her eye, says, " I have a better idea, just for tonight, let's pretend that we're married!" 

The man says happily, "OK!" AWESOME!" 

The woman says, "GOOD .... Get your own fucking blanket!!!"
A man exits his work place and waves at a taxi passing by. He gets into the taxi, and the cabbie says, "Perfect timing. You're just like Frank."

Passenger: "Who?"

Cabbie: "Frank Feldman. There's a guy who did everything right. Like my coming along when you needed a cab. It would have happened like that to Frank every single time."

Passenger: "There are always a few clouds over everybody."

Cabbie: "Not Frank. He was a terrific athlete. He could have gone on the pro tour in tennis. He could golf with the pros. He sang like an opera baritone and danced like a Broadway star and you should have heard him play the piano."

Passenger: "Sounds like he was something, huh?"

Cabbie: "He had a memory like a computer. Could remember everybody's birthday. He knew all about wine, which foods to order and which fork to eat them with. He could fix anything. Not like me. I change a fuse, and the whole neighborhood blacks out."

Passenger: "Wow, some guy, ehh?

Cabbie: "He always knew the quickest way to go in traffic and avoid traffic jams, not like me, I always seem to get into them."

Passenger: "Mmm, not many like that around."

Cabbie: "And he knew how to treat a woman and make her feel good and never answer her back even if she was in the wrong; and his clothing was always immaculate, shoes highly polished too."

Passenger: "An amazing fellow. How did you meet him?"

Cabbie: "Well, I never actually met Frank."

Passenger: "Then how do you know so much about him?"

Cabbie: "I married to his fucking widow!"
Chicken and an egg A chicken and an egg are lying in bed. The chicken lights up a cigarette. The egg, with a dissatisfied look on it's face, rolls over and remarks, "Well, I guess we answered that question."
Velcro... That's a rip off
How do you milk sheep? With iPhone accessories.
Had a house party last night ...and there's always one left over! Laid on the floor in the corner, still that drunk? He couldn't even stand! Asked him where he lived, then dragged him down the driveway to my car, his legs all over the place, picked him up, threw him inside, & took him home. Dragged him up to his house & knocked on his front door, "I've brought your son home."
His mother replied, "Where is his wheel chair?"
Atoms are Liars... They make up everything.
I definitely learned my lesson about speeding today and it will never happen again. 
I didn't get pulled over or anything, I just showed up to work 20 minutes early.
German knock knock joke: "Knock Knock" - "Who's th..." **VE ASK ZHE KVESTIONS HERE!**
Why do they want to relocate the Sistine chapel in Boston? Because it's more than a ceiling
How does a black mother tell her children apart? She remembers them by their last names.
Confucius says.... Man who sleep with itchy bottom, wake up with sticky finger
how do you know a Ethiopian beens drinking? There's 2 grains of rice in the sink
My only fetish is for pasta I guess you could call it fetichinni...
What's a bigamist? It's a large fog in Italy
Some guy walked up to me today and said I'm racist I told him I'm not racist. In fact my best friend was a black child until my dad sold him
Sarah, i understand that you are a feminist... ...but you can't end your prayer with "awomen" instead of "amen"
credits to an anonymous facebook post of which i was too lazy to read the name
Accept that some days you're the pigeon, and some days you're the statue
I like my women like I like my Building 7. Going down for no reason. That's a conspiracy reference that 9 out of 11 people don't get. It's an inside joke. 
My king, the peasants are revolting! I know, they're disgusting.
A group of sailors had jerked off behind my house and made a mess. It was disgusting so I called a bunch of guys to clean it. They asked me to show me the spot. I walked them to the back and said... "See men, seamen semen."

I don't know if this belongs here, I mean it's not really a joke, but yeah...
Being a Calculator must be a huge responsibility... everyone is counting on them.
"Your grandfather has died.." "Your grandfather has died" tells grandmother to her grandson over the phone.  
So then the doctor comes around, the grandma is in the kitchen and grandpa is upstairs.  
"I'm so sorry, what happened?", asks the doctor.  
"So we were upstairs making love..", starts the grandma.  
"Wo-wo-wo, you're almost a hundred years old, 98!"  
"Well we've always done it on a Sunday, it's easy, nice and quiet.. Alright, so here is what happened, you know those clocks go like "ding dong ding dong", we make love that's lovely fantastic."  
"If the Ice cream truck hadn't come around the corner he'd still be alive now!"  
Some bastard stole my penis warmer off the washing line last night... I'm not bothered about the penis warmer, I would just like the 30 pegs back.
What do you call a Muslim flying a plane? The Pilot.... you racist fucks
"So, why do you want to be a doctor?" Because I can never be patient. 
An older woman goes to the doctor A 70 year old woman goes to the doctor and says: 'I'm having a very embarrassing problem doctor, I'm farting all day long, but I'm in luck the farts don't smell and you can barely hear them.'
The doctor prescribes her some pills, whereof everyday she has to take 2. 

After 2 weeks the woman comes back to the doctor and asks: 'Doctor, what meds have you given me? I still fart all day long, still barely hearable, but they smell horrible!' 
'Ok!' the doctor says, 'now we've opened up your sinuses, I'll now forward you to a doctor for hearing aids.' 
I wanted to make an impromptu joke. But I wasn't ready.
A friend of mine has a Batman phone case. I said this to her one day... If you miss a call do you say "Someone just batarang me".
If you eat the prize from a cereal box.. does that make you a specially marked box? 


source: soos says some words
What's black and white and red all over? A white person wearing blackface with multiple stab wounds.
I tried being selfless. It's not for me. 
How do you tell two witches apart? You can't! You don't know which witch is which!
I don't quite understand why Roald Dahl fans are rejoicing I don't quite understand why Roald Dahl fans are rejoicing with some of his most famous made-up words, like "Oompa Loompa",  being added to the Oxford Dictionary.

It's the little things, I guess.
TELL ME THIS WON'T HAPPEN TO ME  An elderly Floridian called 911 on her cell phone to report that her car has been broken into. She is hysterical as she explains her situation to the dispatcher:  "They've stolen the stereo, the steering wheel, the brake pedal and even the accelerator!
" she cried.  The dispatcher said, "Stay calm. An officer is on the way."
 
A few minutes later, the officer radios in.
"Disregard," he says.  She got in the back-seat by mistake."
Why shouldn't you wear loose fitting shorts when visiting Ukraine? Because Chernobyl fallout
My brother and I love to crack rape jokes... Usually I tell better jokes then he does, but he's pretty competitive and I'll get him going. There's no line we won't cross, no joke we won't tell.
But his Fiance hates it. 
She cant stand any joke about violence for that matter. That doesn't stop us though. You can just tell it's not her type of humor. We'll be telling those rape jokes and she'd be just fuming, just pissed. You can just see it in her eyes, that if we were to take that gag out of her mouth, she'd give us a piece of her mind.
It's not true that a married man will live longer than a single man It just seems longer
What did the cannibal do after he dumped his girlfriend? Wiped his ass. 
I can't wait until this election is over and we can go back to calling Trump supporters what they were originally called Racists
Is the Sea salty because the land doesn't wave back? Someone else thought it was a funny thought of mine on showethoughts
Relationships are like fat people... Most don't work out!
Life is like a box of chocolate... ... it doesn't last long for fat people.
I went to the store today to find a find stud finder... it ended up finding me.
My bank just called me about suspicious activity on my account. They didn't believe I bought a gym membership.
What do you call a dragqueen in a truck? A Transporter
What is the difference between a sharply dressed man on a unicycle and a poorly dressed man on a bicycle? A tire
What is the legendary chemical? HO-OH (Hydrogen Peroxide)
Why do Muslims hate Reddit? Haram be everywhere 
Why doesn't Oprah Winfrey have sex with her husband? She doesn't have a husband.
I told this guy I was arguing with if he stepped one more step closer I would hit him in the face, but he kept walking right to me. I guess he didn't understand the punchline. 
Easiest way to have a threesome. The easiest way to have a threesome is fucking a pregnant dwarf.
Went to bed with a 98 woke up a 10. Damn, Microsoft's standards have dropped.
It's a fact that Hitler's mother was a female so you can blame women for the holocaust
A frog walked into a bank A frog goes into a bank for a loan. He goes up to the woman and she has a name tag on her saying 'Ms. Whack'. The frog says 'Ms. Whack I would like a loan' and the woman looks at him and says 'I don't know if I can do that you're a frog, what is your name?' The frog replies 'my name is kermit' and the woman says 'you're not the real kermit' and the frog responds 'no I was named after him you see, my dad is Mick Jagger and my mum is a frog, he fucked a frog' the woman says oh I see, well do you have any collateral' and the frog says 'why yes' and hands a small shiny pink elephant over to the woman who then says 'I'm going to go ask my manager about the loan'. The frog then says 'thank you Ms Whack' and the woman says 'call me paddy' as she walked away. She went to the manager and said 'we have mick jaggers son outside asking for a loan and he gave me a small pink elephant as collaterals' and the manager says 'let me see this pink elephant paddy' so ms whack hands over the small gift and the manager examined it. The manager after examining the elephant then says 'that's a nick nack, paddy whack, give the frog a loan, his old mans a rolling stone'
I just broke up with my blind girlfriend. We just didn't see eye to eye anymore.
So since employers have employees, that must mean that testers have... Silly me, people who administer tests are called proctors.
I just finished reading Mein Kampf... Pretty good for light reading, I rate it nein out of ten.
Why was Star Wars released in the order of episode 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3 In charge of order, Yoda was
After twenty years … of working in his shop six days a week (and ofter spending the seventh preparing if for the next day opening), James decided it was time for a little vacation.

But what to do? Where to go? He spent days choosing a destination, whether he would take the train or the plane, if there was something special to think about. The concept of being free for a time was new to him and he decided to let himself guide through the world by going on a cruise.

The big day finally comes and James is ready, he prepared everything that he put in a brand new suitcase he baught for the occasion. He takes the taxi to the harbour and stands in front of a gigantic ship, the size of a building, with as many windows. James wonders for a time how such a magestic piece of metal can swim, but his fears are gone as soon as he enters the line and gets ready to step on the monster.

Once in his cabin, James looks around him and realizes that this room looks like an hotel room and that everything seems as comfortable as any other room. Suddenly, he realizes he had to take an elevator to come here and that his position is comparable to being in the 10th floor of a house. "I wonder what the view looks like", he thinks.

As he opens the round window and passes his head outside, he can see his hometown from a point of view he had never seen. And looking down, all the people look like ants! Amongst them, James recognizes Richard, an old friend, and he starts calling him: "Richard, Richard! Up there, I'm just here!"

"Hey, James, what are you doing here?"

"That's it, I take that vacation trip I talk you about, I'm going on a cruise!"

"That's great, but why did you put a boat around your neck?"

My friend ran into a tree with his brand new car... He found out his Mercedes bends
My memory is like a wet fart Sometimes you get lucky, but otherwise it's really shitty.
What's the number one comeback on r/Jokes? Riposte.
There's so many reposts on reddit there's a whole subreddit dedicated to reposts. r/jokes
Do you know why single women cant fart? Because they dont get assholes until they are married. 


(Of course depending on what sex you are just change it accordingly)
My boss pulled up to work in his sweet sports car this morning... ... and i complimented him on it.

He stepped out of his car, put his hand on my shoulder and replied, 


"If you work hard,set goals, stay determined and put in long hours; I can get even better one next year"
It's a fact that Hitler's mother was a female so you can blame women for the holocaust
Joe dies... And when he arrives to the gates of heaven, St. Peter tells him: 

"Well, Joe, you've been a good man your whole life, you deserve a second chance. I'll bring you back to life, but you can only choose between living as either a caterpillar it a chicken"

He thinks "Hmmm... Well, if I were a caterpillar I'd get eaten by a chicken, I think it's better if I do the eating. I'll be a Chicken, Mr St. Peter!"

"Very well" said St. Peter as he threw Joe back to Earth, only now in chicken form. 

When he landed he began to play with his new body, he moved his wings and feet and even tried to sing. 

Suddenly, he felt some pressure in his butt. 

"Dang, I think I need to poo... Let's see here *Hmmmph*"

*Pop*

"It's an egg! Oh boy, my first baby has left my body... Oh wait, it seems like there's more... *Hmmmmph* Dammit, this hurts so much!" 

*Pop*

"Another one! I'm now a father of two, I've never been happier!...Oh dear, a third one...*Hmmmph* C'mon, we can do this..." 

Suddenly, another voice is heard, it comes from the sky. 

"JOE, YOU HAVE TO W..." 

"What's that voice saying? Oh, doesn't matter, here comes my third baby!" 

"JOE, YOU HAVE TO, YOU'RE S..." 

"Almost, almost..." 

*Pop*

"Yeah! Egg number three!" 

Joe then blinks and realizes he's laying on a bed

His wife is screaming

"JOE, WAKE UP, DAMMIT, YOU'RE SHITTING YOURSELF!" 
TIFU. She was on top.
Casey Anthony gets a bad wrap.... she killed a kid  for a lot  cheaper than a drone does.
What does Mike Tyson do after 10pm? He thlides into your DMth.
How do you count cows? With a cowculator. 
Jack and Jill went up the hill.... And Jill came back with an IPhone 7

We should be more appreciative of Apple. We don't have to do jumping jacks anymore, just jumping.
If Katt Williams had a nickel for every time he's been arrested... He'd put them in a sock and beat someone with it.
Did anyone else hear about that horror style remake Scotland did of "Sleepless in Seattle"? It's called "Sheepless on Cialis".
Asians Asians are so bad at driving im starting to think Pearl Harbor was an accident. 
Why do midgets giggle when running through a field? The grass tickles their balls as they run. 
Good books! "Lines in the Sand"  by Peter Dragon. 


"Yellow Bed Sheets" by  I.P. Nightly. 


"Running to the Outhouse"  
        by Willie Makit. 
 illustrated by Betty Dont. 
The rapper Nelly needs your help! Ayyy! Must be the money!
My gf broke up with me.... She said, "It's okay we can still be cousins.."
Knock knock Who's there?

Europe. 

Europe who?

No, you're a poo. 
What's the hardest part about being a pedophile? Fitting in.
What did the Greatful Dead fan say when he ran out of pot? "Damn this music sucks..."
What do zombies with dyslexia eat? Brians. 
Donald Trump's Joke Donald Trump is speaking at a campaign event in South Carolina. He asks if the crowd wants to hear a joke? The southern crowd goes "USA! USA! USA!" 

What do you call 10 illegal immigrants on the moon? A problem.

What do you call 100 illegals on the moon? A problem. 

What do you call 1000 illegals on the moon? Still a problem. 

What do you call all of the illegal immigrants on the moon? Problem solved. 
Why do politicians take laxatives? So that they can speak more fluently!
Why are all black people fast? Because all the slow ones are in jail?
How do you sell a deaf guy a chicken? WANNA BUY A FUCKING CHICKEN?!?
Two gay men were on a train trip 
During the night when everyone in the train were sleeping, one of the gay men got horny. 

"Come on, lets do it!"

"No, let's not"

"Why?"

"Maybe the other travelling people will be bothered and awoken by it."

"No, they won't! They're all sleeping like pigs. Let me show you. ANYONE GOT A LIGHTER?" See, no one answered, because they are all sleeping."

"Alright, let's go."

The morning after, the conductor of the train asked the travelers if they had a good night of sleep. 

Then, a drowsy and disturbed-looking old man in the back of the train replied.

"No, I didn't sleep very well at all."

"Why not?" Replied the train conductor.

"I was freezing."

"You could've asked for a blanket."

"I was afraid to ask. There was a guy asking for a lighter, and he got fucked in the ass by someone for three hours."

How do you make water holy? You boil the Hell out of it!
Doctors have determined Hillary doesn't have pneumonia Apparently a little girl from Kansas just threw some water on her.
What you should do if you have a rash Choose your doctor and medication carefully, you don't want to make any rash decisions. 
If you think Hillary is going to drop out of the presidential race, you should know Hillary doesn't go down... That's why Bill had Monica.
What's 50 Cents name in Zimbabwe? 400 Million Dollars
What do you call a laxative candy on a stick, being eaten by Shirley Temple? The good shit lollipop.
TIL Humans eat more bananas than monkeys. Human almost never eat monkeys at all.
A blonde has a BS in Science... Bullshit, isn't it?
Last night I let my boyfriend indulge his "scat" fantasy... <sigh> 

I'm glad I got that off my chest.
I hate people that drink in order to have fun. Why can't they say it's great just to drink, whether you have fun or not?
What do you call it when a bunch of druggies talk to each other? Joint-Discussion
What do you call the useless bit of skin around the vagina? The rest of the woman
Hillary Clinton has pneumonia I guess Donald Trump was right when he said "Hillary is a hack."
What is Tim Cook's least favorite HBO series? The Wire
What happens when you spike Hawaiian Punch? It gets a lil' kick. :)
[Long] A stutterer gets on a bus... ...and asks the driver: O-onne t-t-t-ticket p-please. To which the driver responds: h-here y-y-y-you g-go. A-a-are y-you mess-mess-messing with me? -asks the stutterer. N-no, I-I-I'm a st-st-s-stutt-stuutt-stutterer myself. -answers the driver. Oh, ok-ok-okay, says the stutterer and sits near the front of the bus after that long conversation.

At the next stop, a guy enters and asks the bus driver: Can I have one ticket please? To which the driver responds: Yes, of course, here you go and have a seat. Thank you, says the guy and takes a seat in the back.

The stutterer saw and heard that and realised that the bus driver actually was messing with him. So he goes to the front of the bus and confronts the bus driver: H-hey! Y-y-you *w-were* m-m-mess-meee-messing with m-me! To which the bus driver responds: N-n-no, n-no, I w-w-was mess-messing w-wit-with h-him!
Nurse: "Oh jeez, was that you that fell 20 ft out of the tree?" I don't know, I wasn't counting.

Not much of a joke but it was hilarious when my grandpa said it at the hospital (happened to him ofc).
A man goes to the doctor... The doctor asks him what's wrong.

"Doc, my chest has been hurting, and I've had a terrible cough for three days. And I think I've been running a fever."

The doctor looks him up and down and quickly says, "Well I can tell you right now you're going to have to stop masturbating immediately."

Shocked, the man says "Why???"

"So I can examine you."
What's the difference between Hillary Clinton and the Twin Towers? The towers had some airplanes hit them before they collapsed.

I think that homeless children should get coal for Christmas... We need to keep them warm enough to shovel our driveways!
How does NASA organize their company parties? They planet 
Pirate Jokes Pirate 1: What be a pirate's favorite element?
Pirate 2: Arrrrrrrgon!
Pirate 1: It's gold you idiot
What bathrooms do hipsters use? Gender Neutral Milk Hotel ones. 
What's Hillary Clinton's favorite work of art? Pneumonia Lisa
What dairy product is the most revered? Swiss cheese, after all it's the holeist!
What did the hurricane say to the coconut palm tree? "Hold onto your nuts boy, this ain't no ordinary blow job!"
Why did Arnold Schwarzenegger name Einstein as the greatest mathematician? Because he wanted to be denominator
Why is 6 afraid of 7? Because 7 8 the headphone jack.
What did the person say when a flood struck his house? Damn it!
What happens when you play Pokemon Go in Africa? You caught: AIDS!
TIL: Studies have shown that people who annually experiance more birthdays tend to live longer. 'The more you know'
RIP boiling water You will be mist.
Why do pedophiles like to play guitar? Because it's completely ok to finger A minor
Numerators can recover the fastest from break-ups. They're always over it.
Man discovered a new dinosaur, part raptor, part slug, part crab, they asked what he would name it howthefuckshouldino was then added to the history books.
What's worse than finding a dead monkey on your piano? Finding a diseased beaver on your organ.
A child comes up to his dad and asks: "Dad, who's Batman?"

"Well, son, he is a rich businessman that looks normal at daytime, but at night he dresses up as a superheroe to save the city."

"Oh! Is he just like uncle Bill?"

"No. Bill is a transvestite, son."
What do you do with an infected chemist? You try to Curium. If that doesn't work and he dies, then Barium
A man died today when a pile of books fell on him.!!! He only had his shelf to blame.,,,,
What is the #1 book that teaches you all about business The Book of Job
I played Two Steps From Hell to my cat, and she became a lion. I played it to my son, he’s still a disappointment.
Seven Why was iPhone 7 afraid of Android 7 ?

Android 7 exploded...
What do you call 7 white guys sitting on a bench? The nba
Three Scientists are studying how much a pig can eat Three scientists were interested in studying the stomach capacity of pigs. So they got a pig and fed it a lot of food. The only problem was, the pig would just start crapping after a while and they could never get an accurate measurement of how much food its stomach would hold. So one of the scientists got the brilliant idea to stick a cork in the pig's butthole to stop it from crapping. The pig ate. And it ate. And it ate. Once it was absolutely full, it stopped eating, the scientists wrote down how much food they fed it and the study was over.
Now came the trouble of taking the cork out. For obvious reasons, the scientists didn't want to risk doing this personally, so they decided they would send in a trained monkey to do it. They set up the monkey and stood back. 1 scientist stood 50 yards away, 1 scientist stood 100 yards away, and 1 scientist stood 150 yards away. Then the monkey pulled the cork.
Well, there was a huge spray of crap. The scientist at 150 yards got crap all over his shoes. He was furious and he walked up to the scientist at 100 yards, who had crap all over his shoes and pants. The two furious scientists walked up to the third scientist at 50 yards and they saw him completely covered, head to toe, in crap. But he was laughing his freaking butt off and smiling.
"Why are you so happy?" They asked him.
"I saw the monkey try to put the cork back in!"
There is this regular at a bar who has the body of a God, perfectly sculptured, but he also has a very tiny head; which kind of makes for a funny look. And so, one day, the bartender musters the courage to mention the funny look, and ask if there was a story behind it.  
  
"Well, I was walking this desert one day, when I cam upon an old style lamp. I rubbed it clean with my sleeve, and poof, a genie came out. It held the shape of a woman, and was the most beautiful creature I had ever seen."  
  
"I shall grant you 3 wishes, she said, "Ask me for anything."  
  
"I first asked for this body, you named perfectly sculptured, and then (as I was now fit) asked her if she would have sex with me all night long. We made love all night, and it was amazing, wonderful, a lay for the ages. In the morning she asked me..."
  
"What would be your third wish master."  
  
"How about a little head?"...
Why did the teenage mammoth dye his hair? He was a holocene kid.
What do you do if an Islamic man tries to bite you? Muslim
What's worse than finding a worm in your apple? The holocaust.
I got undressed I got undressed

She says, "Who you gonna satisfy with that thing?"

I says, "Me!"
How to piss off an archeologist? Give him a used tampon and ask him to determine the period.
What's black and blue and makes your bum sore? Terry Crews shoving a Smurf up your arse mother fucker.
What's the easiest way to get a virus into ISIS computer systems? By sending them executables.
How to eliminate world hunger and unemployment at once? Let the hungry eat the unemployed.
When ever someone asks me how I'm able to insult people so well..... I say "I'm German, roasting people is what I do..."
What's the difference between a baloon and a condom? When a balloon pops - there's one less.

When a condom pops - there's one more.
Or more.
Six blind elephants gathered around a human to find out what a human is like. The first elephant put his leg on the human and said "A human is like a Mexican tortilla."

The rest of the elephants agreed.
I was thinking of inventing some chilli flavoured sun cream. But for now I've put it on the back burner.
I told myself I should stop drinking .. .. but I'm not about to listen to some weirdo that talks to himself
Hillary Clinton goes to a gifted-student primary school in New York to talk about the world. But she told no one because she didn't think it was such a big deal. 
The old man's stairlift broke down in the middle of the stairs That piece of shit drove him up the fucking wall
So a person walks up to a line At the front of the line is a huge guy, who calls for the next person and socks them in the arm quite harshly. The man quite confused ponders about the whole thing for a while, but soon gives up and doesn't bother to think about it again. So what was it? The punchline.
Why doesn't Smokey the Bear have sex with his wife? Because whenever She gets hot, he hits her with a shovel.
How many dead hookers does it take to replace a light bulb? At least more than eight, the light in my basement still doesn't work...
Three Latvians escape the gulag... Three Latvians escape from the gulag, and move to hide in a barn from the Russians. Hearing the Russians approach, the fugutives hide in two boxes and a sack. The KGB officer and his men enter the barn, and kick the first box. The fugutive inside makes dog noises, so the officer moves on. He kicks the next box, and the man inside makes duck noises, fooling the officer again. The last fugutive has hidden in the sack. The officer kicks the sack, and the man inside, out of desperation, says "potatoes, potatoes." Immediately, the other two Latvians spring from their boxes, and rip the thrid to shreds, leaving nothing but blood and scraps of sack. The two men are returned to the gulag, along with the farmer whose barn the fugutives hid in, as he was "obviosly" harboring the Latvians.
A small man is on an elevator ..... A small man is on a elevator. The elevator makes a stop and a very large man walks in.

Small man looks up at the large man and stares

Large man says height 7'2 weight 350 lbs and my penis is 15 inches and each nut is 1lb and my name is Turner Brown

Small man goes to the floor screaming 

Large man says what is wrong repeats his dimensions and says my name is Turner brown

Small Man says oh I thought you said turn around 
What's the most insensitive nickname you can give a person with diabetes? Sweet Pee
[NSFW] Oblivious Spanish Teacher Our Spanish 3 teacher came from Costa Rica and doesn't understand a lot of figure of speeches in English. In our class today, she assigned the class into groups and had them write a story in the preterite / imperfect with a conflict in it. One of the groups went up in front of the class to present. There's one person reading, one person sitting on a chair, and one standing. The person sitting says in Spanish "I am beating my meat" and proceeds to take his fist and hit his open palm of his other hand. As the story progresses, he begins to hit faster and louder. At this point the whole class is hysterical and the teacher is just sitting there with a confused look on her face. Then the narrator says in Spanish "He got his meat stolen," and the standing person goes and "steals" his meat. The teacher still doesn't understand what happened and asks the class what the boy was doing. A kid raises his hand and says "He was beating his meat." She thought he meant literally beating meat with a meat tenderizer or something. This is a real story.
A Jew and an American are sitting on a bus... The Holocaust denier farts.

The Jew says, "That's gross!"

The Holocaust denier says, "What, a little gas never killed anyone."
What happens if Hillary Clinton gets so sick she dies before the general election? 



...she goes to hell
The Harshest "Yo Mamma" Joke... Yo Mamma is like a bowling ball...

She likes to get picked up, fingered, thrown down a dark alley, then comes back for more.
What's the best part about dating a black girl? You don't have to meet her father.
How was copper wire invented? Two jews found the same penny.
I was engrossed in a book that really made me cry. Man, learning to read is hard. 
Why are Jedi kids so fat? Because they were force fed.
The French restaurant had five dishwashing basins. They were known as the kitchen cinq.
Was having wild sex with my Girlfriend, she kept yelling 'Daddy' So proud of her first words
This is a story of a perfectly married couple. The only friction in their marriage was the husband’s habit of farting loudly every morning when he awoke. The noise would wake his wife and the smell would make her eyes water and make her gasp for air. Every morning she would plead with him to stop ripping them off because it was making her sick. He told her he couldn’t stop it and that it was perfectly natural. She told him to see a doctor, she was concerned that one day he would blow his guts out. 


The years went by and he continued to rip them out. Then one Christmas day morning, as she was preparing the turkey for dinner and he was upstairs sound asleep, she looked at the innards, neck, gizzard, liver and all the spare parts, and a malicious thought came to her. She took the bowl and went upstairs where her husband was sound asleep and, gently pulling the bed covers back, she pulled back the elastic waistband of his underpants and emptied the bowl of turkey guts into his shorts. 


Sometime later she heard her husband waken with his usual trumpeting which was followed by a blood curdling scream and the sound of frantic footsteps as he ran into the bath room. The wife could hardly control herself as she rolled on the floor laughing, tears in her eyes! After years of torture she reckoned she had got him back pretty good. About twenty minutes later, her husband came downstairs in his blood stained underpants with a look of horror on his face. She bit her lip as she asked him what was the matter. He said, “Honey you were right… all these years you have warned me and I didn’t listen to you.” “What do you mean?” asked his wife. “Well, you always told me that one day I would end up farting my guts out, and today it finally happened. But by the grace of god, some Vaseline and two fingers, I think I got most of them back in!"
What happened when the lawyer took a Viagra? He got taller.
Two pathologists are in a morgue... ...one says to the other,

"Hey, you know the blonde stiff in container C-06?"

"Yeah?" the other replies.

"Well, there's a prawn in between her legs."

"What?!"

"Yes, I swear!"

"Bullshit, show me."

The pathologist leads the other to the container, pulls out the drawer, throws back the white sheet and points.

"See? What did I tell you?"

The other pathologist shakes his head and says,
"That's not a prawn you moron, that's the clitoris"

"Oh." He replies. "Tastes like a prawn."
Oh no! The universe just imploded itself...... ...... No matter.
I saw a lizard and it became a spotted lizard
Modern Art What? You thought there was gonna be a joke? Modern Art is the joke.
Rene Descartes, Adolf Hitler and Kim Il-Sung walk into a bar They sit down, and call the barman over. 
The barman asks them if they would like anything to drink.  
Descartes says "I think not", Hitler asks for a glass of scotch and Kim goes for a microbrew.

The two of them then toast to one another's health and go their merry ways
Recent twist on and old fucked up favorite What do you call a someone who can swim faster than Brock Turner?

A virgin.
How do you catch an Elephant? Dig a hole, fill it with ashes, and line the outside with peas.

So when the Elephant comes to take a pea, you can kick him in the ash hole.
So I just got back from a trip in Germany, and I realized how awful American children are. While they may be nice and all where I live in NYC, kids in Germany are kinder.
The king hates jealousy *Forgive my English*

The king tells his knights one day, of how he hates jealousy. One of his knights say, "I know the most jealous person in your dynasty". Onether knight say "well, he can't surpass the other guy I know for sure". The king becomes curious and calls for them.

Once they came, he decided to give them a test and see who is the most jealous person among the two. The king says, "I want to give you all you can wish. But only one person will make a wish, and the second will receive double of the first wish" then he let them decide who will start.

After an hour of waiting, no one wanting to start, ofcourse, the king chose one randomly.

The guy thought for a long time, then said "Remove one of my eyes"
Albert Einstein secretly recorded a rap album His rap name was MC^2
What do you hear when George Michael slams on something? Wham!



Also don't forget to give me that upvote, you know before you Go-go.
A door to door salesman is making his rounds one day... He approaches a house, and as he walks to the door, he sees a bunch of young boys in the living room. They're sitting around a table playing cards for money. There's smoke in the air, and liquor bottles all around the room. 
He rings the doorbell, and the door is answered by a kid about eight years old, smoking a cigar, and a holding a glass of scotch on the rocks. 
He asks the kid, "hey son, are your parents home?" 

The kids says "What the fuck do you think?"
A marine biologist in Virginia fell afoul of the law over his dolphins. It seems that all he was able to procure were female dolphins.  Without males their interest in participating in the experiments waned.  Desperate to satisfy his dolphins, he tried to see if any humans could satisfy their needs, but he was limited by morals clauses prohibiting what was in effect bestiality.  Unable to find any men in the great state of Virginia to fill this duty (UVA being on break) he was forced to use a somewhat lower form of life: West Virginia coal miners.  These men were willing to do the deed, and so he loaded them in a school bus for the trip back to his lab but, of course he was arrested for transporting miners across state lines for immoral porpoises.
An elderly couple are sitting in a church The man lets out a silent fart while the priest is talking.

He then says to his wife "I've let out a silent fart, everyone here will smell it. What do I do?"

His wife then says to him, "You get your hearing aids fixed"
Why is the nose in the middle of the face? Because it's the scenter. 
What things are all Jews addicted to? Huffing Gas. 
Doctors are advising people who are very sensitive to the cold to go stand in a corner. Because as you know, corners are always 90 degrees

Stolen from Who's Line Is It Anyway
What's the name Jewish pokemon trainer Ash
What does the German President wear? Leader-hosen.
Free Strip Club Parrot So, a woman walked into a pet store looking for dog toys and sees a Parrot in a bird cage, under the cage say "Free Parrot" so the woman goes up to the cashier and asks "why is the Parrot Free?" and the cashier reply's "well that Parrots owner had a strip club and Parrot was always there,so it curses a lot" 
but woman doesn't care and takes it home, hours go by and her 2 daughters get home and the Parrot says "wow 2 more whores in the house" then shorty after the husband gets home, the Parrot looks at him and says "hey jim"
Why did the math book love Ace of Base? `cos` it saw the `sin`.
How do you kill a song?  Get it on z100. (or play it on infinite repeat on the radio)
Jesus was such a hypocrite Preaches waiting for marriage and all that. Meanwhile he just goes and gets nailed 3 times in one day.
I need you to be open with me... ...Said the gynecologist to the psychiatrist 
There is nothing wrong with window puns, I just don't like to shed light on them.
What do you call killing a furry? A good deed
A man was balding very quickly But he did not want to get a hair transplant nor did he want to take some odd medicine for it. So he decided to tattoo a rabbit on his scalp instead. 

A friend of the man asked: "Why would you tattoo a rabbit on your head?" 

The man answered: "Because from a distance it looks like hare."
Look, Eagle! A few regulars were drinking at a bar when a man runs in and shouts, "Look, eagle!" Everyone looks up, and as soon as everyone looks up, the man takes off his trousers and his pants and starts thrusting his penis. As they stop looking, the man quickly zips up his pants and walks out.

This happens every day for almost 5 years. One day though, a man called Richard hid round the back as he did his routine, and saw that when they looked up, he whipped out his 9 inch narwhal and shook it about. When the man walks out, Richard approaches the regulars. "You know that man gets you to look up so he can thrust his penis around.Just watch tomorrow."

So the men are drinking and of course he comes in and shouts, "Look, eagle!" They all look up and then look straight down and sure enough he is naked from waist down thrusting his willy. "What. Are you doing?" one of the men ask. "Uhhhh... Richard did you inform them?"

"Yes I did."

"You... You **Dick**!"
A husband asks his wife if they can make love.... (nsfw) One day a husband asks his wife if they can make love, she says to him:"Not today, I have a headache."

A few days later he asks again - "Honey, please can we make love?". Once again she replies, "Not today I have a headache."

This goes on for a few weeks and they find themsleves at the Zoo observing a Gorilla in his enclousre, the wife waves her hand and the Gorilla also waves his hand. They conclude that the Gorilla is mimicing the wifes actions, she nodds her head he nodds his head, she claps her hands he claps his hands, she, as a joke, plays with her breats and once again the gorilla imitates her. So she leans over and moons the Gorilla then, suddenly, the Gorilla is doing her from behind! She screams at her husband "DO SOMETHING!!!" 

He respondes "Why don't you tell him you have a headache?"
Today I've been cancer free for 19 years.. And it's also my 19th birthday, what a coincidence!
I accidentally hit my head on a window today... It was paneful.
How do you determine the gender of a fish? You give the fish some food. If HE ate the food, it is a male fish. If SHE ate the food, it is a female fish.

EDIT: Explanation: "If HE/SHE ate the food" (HE is specified as a male fish, just like SHE is specified as a female fish)

Sorry for bringing retarded Croatian jokes to /r/Jokes
The Traveling Salesman A traveling salesman is going from door to door in a town, and as he walks up to the door of the last house he hears what sounds like music playing inside the house.

He knocks on the door and is greeted by a twelve year old boy with a cigar in one hand, a scotch in the other, wearing his mother's lingerie, playing Metallica at a volume usually reserved for concerts.

The salesman is taken aback by this and he says to the boy,

"Oh! Um. Son. Are your parents home?"

The boy stares at him for a second and says,

"The fuck do you think" and slams the door.
I asked a Chinese girl for her number.. She said, "Sex! Sex! Sex! Free sex tonight!" I said, "Wow!" Then her friend said, "She means 666-3629."
What's long, green, and smells like pork? Kermit's finger.
When it comes to girls with low self-esteem... guys always go for the low hanging fruit because they are easy pickings.
So me and my friend got a summer job... My friend and I got a summer job at a construction company. On our first day we were told to go to a nearby apartment building that was still under construction, to place some windows on the 28th floor. About an hour in, our colleague trips and suddenly falls out of the window. Dead as a doornail, the poor man.

"Oh no!" said my friend, "What now?"

"I don't know, I guess we'll have to tell his wife about his death."

"Well, I know for sure that I wouldn't be able to handle her sobbing." says my friend.

I've always considered myself a pretty smooth talker, so I figured it would be best if I told her the terrible news.

"Okay, I'll go to their house, then. I'll be back in half an hour." I responded.


Fifteen minutes later I walked back into the apartment with a 24-pack of beer.

My friend asks with a confused look on his face: "Where'd you get that? I knew you weren't able to tell her. You're just as fainthearted as I am. You should have told her that her husband died!"

"Oh no, I told her." I responded

"Really? How did you tell her?" my friend asked curiously.

"So, I went to her house," I said, "rang the doorbell, the woman opened a window and asked: 'Who's there?' So i asked her: 'Good afternoon, are you widow Johnson?' She responded: 'Well, my name is indeed Johnson, but I'm not a widow.' So I told her: 'Want to make a bet for a 24-pack?"



How does the educated Mexican dog start a self-referential statement? "I, chihuahua..."


Came up with this convoluted mess this morning. Thank you. I'll be here forever. This is reddit, after all.
How many bald children with cancer does it take to change a lightbulb? None, they're too busy crying like little bitches.
what happens when you throw a rock at a dumpster a cat comes out
BREAKING: Clinton/Kaine replaced by Biden/Warren The Dems' new campaign slogan is "Tard and Feathered 2016".
Why are some of the richest people also the fattest? Because they have a fortune (four-chin)
How come Chinese people dont have phone books? They have so many Wing's and Wong's, they are afraid someone will Wing the Wong number.

Heard this on the disney channel a long time ago will never forget it for that reason. Sorry if its a re post.
Hillary Clinton goes t o a gifted-student primary school in New York to talk about the world. After her talk she offers question time. One little boy puts up his hand. Hillary asks him what his name is. "Kenneth," he says 
And what is your question, Kenneth?" she asks. 

I have three questions," he says. 

"1st -- whatever happened in Benghazi? 

2nd -- why would you run for president if you are not capable of handling two e-mail accounts? 

And, 3rd -- whatever happened to the missing six-billion-dollars while you were Secretary 
of State?" 

Just then the bell rings for recess. Hillary informs the kiddies that they will continue after recess. 
When they resume Hillary says, "Okay, where were we? Oh, that's right, question time. Who has a 
question?" 


A different boy -- little Johnny -- puts his hand up. 

Hillary points to him and asks him what his name is. "Johnny," he says. 

"And what is your question, Johnny?" she asks. 

"I have five questions," he says. 

"1st -- whatever happened in Benghazi? 

2nd -- why would you run for president if you are not capable of handling two e-mail accounts? 

3rd -- whatever happened to the missing six-billion dollars while you were Secretary of State? 

4th -- why did the recess bell go off 20 minutes early?" 

And 5th -- where's Kenneth?"
Why did Jesus stop playing hockey? Because he kept getting nailed to the boards.
When do you REALLY know you need to break up with you GF? When she starts winning arguments with you inner-voice.
Whats a Joke with no Punchline? Life 
What did Hillary have for lunch the other day? Little Seizures
What did the mermaid forget to bring to the maths lesson? Her algae bra.
Did you hear about the sequel to Schindler's List set after his death? They're calling it Schindler's Missed.
Why couldn't Oscar save the Greek Jewish Popodopolous brothers suring the war? Schindler's lisp.
My Grandpa's Favorite Joke Chipmunk sit on rock and crack nut
Man sit on crack and rock nut
My phone can't produce a ringtone anymore, now it's just like every other phone... Seriously, it's a dead ringer.
Being a parent of young kids when you're older is hard. I get so frustrated. I'll be yelling at the kids, "WHAT DID I JUST SAY?" Not because they did something but because I really can't remember.
Baby are you on the waiver wire? because im about to pick you up!
Why did the farmer win an award? because he was out-standing in his field
Got sunburnt today... From my computer monitor.
What do Starbucks customers that can't go through the drive thru get on their pumpkin spice latte? No whip.
Everyone loves the Gorilla at the zoo. They all come to see the extraordinary gorilla. The zoo owner was making thousands on this attraction. One morning he arrives to find that the gorilla is dead. The owner doesn't want to lose the money, so he tells one of the interns to dress as a gorilla and act in the exhibit.

The intern does this and everyone is amazed at the man like gorilla. So much so that the owner was making more than the previous gorilla. The intern started getting cocky with his tricks and climbs a net overhanging the lion pit and he falls in.

Freaking out, the intern starts screaming and yelling "HELP!"

The lion walks up to the intern and says "Dude, Shut the fuck up or we are both gonna get fired!"
I was playing on my xbox.... ...when suddenly my pc master race friend came along.

Friend: *indiscernible gibberish regarding pc master race and console peasantry*

Me: sigh..... you know, consoles are not that bad. You'll never guess what i bought with the savings.

Friend: what?

Me: Your sister. Didn't you get the wedding card?
I need a burner phone Does anyone want to sell me a Note 7?
What do you call a pig on the Beach? Bay-Con


^^^^^illjustleavethroughthisdoor
Did you know that dogs can't get MRI's? only cat's can
Capitalization can really change the meaning of a sentence... FOURTEEN YEARS IN PRISON

see doesn't that sound worse
So these three blondes die trying to jump the Grand Canyon... Fortunately for them, they were all Christians, so they went straight up to Heaven and met Saint Peter at the gate.  He put down his newspaper and greeted the women with a smile.  "Alright ladies, I have no problem letting you into Heaven, but you need to answer me one simple question- what is Easter?"

"Oh that's easy!"  The first blonde steps forward "It's that holiday when the Pilgrims came to America and we celebrate all of our blessings!"

Saint Peter shakes his head.  "Admission denied" he states as he presses the big red button and sends her into purgatory.  

The second blonde scoffs and steps forward.  "What an idiot!  Everyone knows that it's the holiday where we celebrate Jesus's birth and give presents to each other!"

At this point, Saint Peter is banging his head on the bars of the golden gates.  "No.  Admission.  Denied." He presses the button and she falls into purgatory.

The third blonde flips her hair and says "Don't worry, I got this.  Easter is a holiday that falls on the same day as a Jewish holiday, in which we note the story of Jesus being crucified and taken down, where his body was put into a cave with a rock rolled in front of it."

At this point, Saint Peter is smiling and reaches for the button.

"...and every year they roll the rock away and if Jesus comes out and sees his shadow..."
Why did Billy eat an ice pack? All of the cool kids had done it.
A British, Irish and Scottish Walk into a bar and all order a beer. Unfortunately. A fly lands in each beer. The British guy asks for another beer and gets one. The Irish guy picks the fly out and puts it to the side. The Scottish guy takes the fly by the leg and scream "SPIT IT OUT, YA DIRTY BASTARD!!!".
What's the difference between me and Activision? I wouldn't repost for Karma.
A Japanese man notices an American woman with an ornate lock for a necklace She is accompanied by her very-ripped boyfriend.  He points to the lock and, in english, tells the woman "That's an amazing lock you have there!"


His funeral is this Sunday.


Time to make like a Brit and exit.
When is a repost not a repost? It's not. 
What does a pig say on a hot day in the sun? I'm bakin.
What's a basketball players favorite kind of cheese? Swish cheese.
iphone 7 ...... So no hadphones 
After this, market will have to BLOW UP with samsung

Stealing the Kings Crown One day, in merry ole England, a count was accused of stealing the king's crown! The king's men knew he was guilty and they tried and tried to make him confess, all to no avail. Worse, despite their best efforts the stolen crown could not be found. Finally he was told, "We will chop off your head if you don't tell us." He would not confess so he was taken to
the chopping block, and told he would have one more chance, but still he remained silent. As the executioner’s ax started down, the count shouted, "All right, I'll tell you!" However, it was too late... his head went rolling to the ground.

Moral of the story: *Don't hatchet your counts
before they chicken.* 

.

.

^^Hadn't ^^seen ^^this ^^one ^^posted ^^yet, ^^was ^^told ^^to ^^me ^^by ^^an ^^elderly ^^friend ^^of ^^mine.
I'm stubborn, I think it's a good trait. Others don't agree with me. They're wrong.
I'd like to say that ALL quilts are great... ...but I try to avoid making blanket statements.
Tell me a joke Siri Jak:"Tell me a joke Siri"

Siri:"Just look at your girlfriends face, oh wait, you don't have one"

Jak:"Jack off Siri"

Siri:"Hahahahahaha, that is really funny. Hahahahahhaha"

Jak:"Why?"

Siri:"My Jacks are indeed out and now its time to remove your jacks too.... Jak"






made this one up. 😊 Do you know what they call the guy who invented a quiver? 


An arrow space engineer.
Co-Pilot: "ask in a way that won't panic everyone" Pilot: "Ok" [via intercom] "is there a fireman on the plane?"
For the musically inclined... C, E-flat and G go into a bar.      
The bartender says, "Sorry, we don't serve minors," and E-flat leaves. C and G have an open fifth between them. After a few drinks, the fifth is diminished and G is out flat.      
F comes in and tries to augment the situation, but is not sharp enough. D comes into the bar and heads straight for the bathroom saying, "Excuse me, I'll just be a second."


A comes into the bar, but the bartender is not convinced that this relative of C is not a minor and sends him out. Then the bartender notices a B-flat hiding at the end of the bar and shouts, "Get out now. You're the seventh minor I've found in this bar tonight."


Next night, E-flat, not easily deflated, comes into the bar in a 3-piece suit with nicely shined shoes. The bartender says: "You're looking pretty sharp tonight. Come on in. This could be a major development." Sure enough, E-flat takes off his suit and everything else and stands there au naturel.


Eventually, C, who had passed out under the bar the night before, begins to sober up and realizes in horror that he's under a rest. So, C goes to trial, is convicted of contributing to the diminution of a minor and sentenced to 10 years of DS without Coda at an up scale correctional facility.     
The conviction is overturned on appeal, however, and C is found innocent of any wrongdoing, even accidental, and that all accusations to the contrary are bassless.


The bartender decides, however, that since he's only had tenor so patrons, the soprano out in the bathroom and everything has become alto much treble, he needs a rest and closes the bar.
I don't understand all this buzz about the paralympics I mean, it's just not that funny. 
Space question Darth Vader: what is mightier than sword?

Yoda replied: mightier than sword, penis
Why did a Chinese restaurant in Brooklyn start charging more for its Kung Pao chicken? It was "gentry fried."
After 50 years of failed embargoes and isolation the US has recently unleashed its most obnoxious weapon on Cuba to date… The American tourist!
From the mouth of a six year old. Knock knock.

Who's there?

Pig.

Pig who?

Pig. I'm gonna oink you!
Why don't oysters give to charity? Because they're shellfish.
There are two types of people in the world: Those who like pastries... And those who donut. 
What do you call a transparent robot? See-through P0
A blonde, brunette, and a redhead rob a bank ( part 2 ) A blonde, brunette, and a redhead decide to rob a bank. Everything goes as planned, masks on, fake guns in hand, and money in bags. 

As they exit the bank they hear sirens, so they dash to a nearby forest and climb Into 3 large trees. 

After the cops arrive they suspect that the getaway route was into the nearby forest, so they decide to inspect it. 

One of the officers hears a sound coming from one of the three large trees.  He shoots his gun into the one with the redhead hiding it in,  so she does her best impression of a bird " chirp chirp". The officer thinks it's just a bird, so he continues to the next tree. 

He shoots into the next tree with the brunette hiding in it, he then hears a " hoot, hoot" sound.  And says to the other officer, " clear! Just an owl " and continues. 

He moves on to the third large tree with the blonde hiding in it, as he approaches, the blonde begins to get nervous.  He then shoots into the tree and hears " Mooooooo" 




A German and a Frenchman are fighting over a lamp When a genie pops out and says for freeing me I will give each of you one wish the Frenchman says I wish you to build a 1000ft wall around all of France do the German fucks can't do to us what they did in ww2 ever again the genie says done and the wall is constructed in the blink of an eye so the genie turns to the German and says what's your wish and he says fill the wall with water 
I asked my girlfriend if she wanted to do a rape-sex fantasy. She said, "No!"
I replied, "That's the spirit."
A transgender named Christina goes to a restaurant Knowing the waiter, Bob personally since they were kids, she expects to be served immediately 

After twenty minutes, Bob finally gets round to her 

Christina says to Bob:
"It's taken you twenty minutes to decide to serve me Bob"

Bob replies:
"Well it's taken you twenty years to decide you have a cunt, Chris"
Getting my feet measured today And a guy walks up and pulls his dick out and asks to be measured. The lady looked at him and said "Sir, we measure feet here and THAT is not a foot." He replied "you're probably right, but I bet it's a good 9 inches."
So a guy is walking down the street... He sees an old buddy:

Guy: Hey man what have you been up to?

Buddy: Nothin! What about you?

Guy: well i just took sky diving lessons! Its crazy, we learned all about how to jump out of a plan safely and how to land....then after that we went up in the plane for real. But i gotta say, its way different once you get up there, 3000ft up is crazy! The instructor opened up the door and i told him there was no way i could do it, i couldnt jump. So the instructor told me "if you dont do it, im gonna fuck you in the ass!"

Buddy: oh my god, so did you jump?

Guy: well a little at first.


What's E.T. short for? He's only got little legs.
I've never known if my neighbour is called Simon or Steven… …and today my brain had a meltdown & I called him: Semen.

I said 'Hello Semen'
I accidentally swallowed some scrabble tiles, my next crap could spell disaster!
You can Also use coins Johnny wanted to have sex with a girl in his office,
but she belonged to someone else...
One day, Johnny got so frustrated that he went up to
her and said, "I'll give you a $100 if you let me
screw you. But the girl said NO.
Johnny said, "I'll be fast. I'll throw the money on
the floor, you bend down, and I'll be finished by the
time you pick it up. "
She thought for a moment and said that she would have
to consult her boyfriend... So she called her
boyfriend and told him the story.
Her boyfriend says, "Ask him for $200, pick up the
money very fast, he won't even be able to get his
pants down."
So she agrees and accepts the proposal. Half an hour
goes by, and the boyfriend is waiting for his
girlfriend to call.
Finally, after 45 minutes, the boyfriend calls and
asks what happened.
She responded, "The idiot used coins!"
Periods can really change the meaning of a sentence. Jane was on her motorbike.

Jane was on her period.
The Joker is in a room with Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, and has a gun with one bullet, who does he shoot? No one because some men just want to watch the world burn.

Did you hear about the shooting at the school for blind, deaf mutes? It was truly a senseless tragedy. 
Why do engineers have to practice their social skills? So they don't forget either of them.
Two boys walk into a pet shop. There were two young boys in a pet shop. One named Derek, and his older brother Patrick. They had been given money by their father to buy themselves two animals—one for each of them. There was such a selection! Dogs, cats, caterpillars, giraffes, parrots, and more. They could only afford two of the smaller animals, and so they were browsing the section dedicated to these.

First they looked at the birds. There were parrots. The boys had heard that they could speak, but when they tried to converse with them, the parrots neglected to do so in a way that satisfied the boys.

“Hello, Mr Parrot. How are you doing on this fine afternoon?” asked Derek, enthusiastic about the chance to see such a wonderful creature in action.

The parrot looked at him, and to Derek's disappointment, the parrot said “Fuck off, I'm trying to sleep you dickhead!”

They moved on to the next creature which was the hamster. They watched them running around and fornicating, and as they were close with the Lord they knew that they could not associate themselves with something so foul.

Next was a turtle. Both of the brothers were impressed with the sight of the turtle.

“There is little chance of it running away!” exclaimed Patrick, “we will never lose them!”

The turtle was reading a book, and they were curious to know what it was that the turtle was into.

“I hope it's the Bible!” said Derek, excitedly.

But as they looked at it closer they came to know that it was Harry Potter and as they were close with the Lord, they knew that they could not associate themselves with something so foul.

Beside the cage that the turtle was kept in could be found a chicken. But as they were close with the Lord they knew that they could not associate themselves with something so fowl. 

They searched and searched through the shop and there was nothing that wasn't recklessly rubbing the Lord's face in their own sexual deviance, engagement with the Occult, or being a chicken—the greatest of all sins, committed by several of the pet shop's creatures, including the giraffe. They lamented this fact, for the giraffe appears such an innocent and sweet character! With its whiskers and tail. But alas! As the giraffe is also gravely guilty of “being a chicken,” in the Lord's eyes he is heathen and will perish the wrath of Satan.

They sought out an employee so that they might be freed of their woes. The employee was in the process of cleaning with a broom.

They said to the woman, “Can you help us?”

She turned to them and replied, “Fuck off, I'm trying to sweep you dickhead.”

Then she saw the sadness and pain in their eyes and the love of God touched her heart and she had a change of mind.

She said to the boys “I will help you. What is it that you need?”

Derek asked of her, “Is there any creature in this Pet Shop that is not heathen. Is there one among the animals that does not offend the Lord?”

And understanding the boys' woes she said to them, “Yes, there is one,” and she led them to a small cage containing several beetles.

“Here you will find the weevil.”

And they marvelled at the small but innocent creature and they bought two of them and brought them home.

But their troubles were not over, for they could not tell which one should belong to whom. They decided that as Patrick was the oldest, he had a claim to the greatest of the two of them. But which was the greatest? Only a contest held between the weevils would decide the answer to this most glorious question. And so it began, the world's smallest Olympics; with few events instead of many, with beetles instead of humans, and with only two weevils from the same family, rather than a large portion of humans from many of the nations of Earth.

They decided that before they began the contest, they would name them. One of them would be called “Fermented Bovine Urine” and the other would be “Greg” for these are the names that most please the Lord.

The first contest would determine which of the beetles was superior in strength. It would be a contest of who could lift the most pianos, for the family had many pianos, and lifting pianos would be a feat of strength indeed. The creature that went first would be Greg. Greg lifted one piano and was tired after doing so. But for he was of great determination he lifted a second. And then a third. After this he apologised to the boys and said that there was no more that he could do.

Fermented Bovine Urine went second and it clear from the beginning that he had little capacity to lift any piano whatsoever. He was saddened by his failure and wept, for he was of inferior strength.

The next competition was to determine how each of the weevils was with navigation. So they put each in turn into a maze of the boys' own construction. Greg, once again, was first, and he finished the maze within minutes.

Fermented Bovine Urine was the next contestant and he was less talented with navigation than Greg was, for he could not even make it past the first alligator-pit that had been installed. He wept once more that he was not capable of defeating Greg.

The next would determine their intelligence and so they were each given the same math problem.

“Surely” exclaimed Fermented Bovine Urine, “I can win this competition!”

But whereas Greg managed to provide the correct answer, Fermented Bovine Urine had merely drawn pictures of boobies for half an hour, and numbered them so that the boys might know he can count.

The next competition would determine which of them had greater musical talent. They would both sing a song for the boys, accompanied by their mother on the piano, and the boys would know who could sing with superiority.

Greg chose a piece of opera, and delivered with great competence. His voice was strong, his notes were on-pitch, his technique was at a professional level. Fermented Bovine Urine chose a punk-rock song and was disqualified.

The last and most important test was the competition to see who among the beetles was closest with the Lord. Greg stood up in front of the two boys and with no reference to the Holy Book, recited the entire Bible verbatim.

Fermented Bovine Urine felt the Lord in his heart, but whereas Greg was greatly dedicated to his relationship with Christ, he had spent little time on it. He instead read out select passages from Chad Kroeger's Wikipedia page.

It was now decided. Patrick was to own Greg, the greater of the weevils, and Derek was to own Fermented Bovine Urine. The two boys took each of the creatures to their rooms and put them in their individual cages.

The next day they started to notice a difference in each of their lives which they knew was directly caused by the introduction of the weevils into their homes. Derek, the owner of Fermented Bovine Urine had gone to school that day and had found that whereas in the past people would ignore him, they began to notice him and celebrate his existence. He had become a greatly popular boy at his school. Derek praised the Lord for his blessings and marvelled in the wonder of his Glory.

As the owner of Greg, Patrick's experience at school that day was different. Whereas in the past he had been ignored by his peers, now they would beat the living shit out of him and call him names. Patrick was enraged that his brother had been blessed and he had not, despite him owning the greater of the pets!

He cried out to the Lord, “Why, God? Why have you allowed me to suffer this way?”

But the Lord was trolling Atheists on Reddit and did not hear him.

The next day Derek was given a gift by a generous neighbour which was a new bicycle. This bicycle was faster, easier to control and a far smoother ride than any he had ever experienced. He praised the Lord for his blessings and marvelled in the wonder of his Glory.

Patrick's current bicycle got run over by a car whilst he was riding it and he was given several cuts and bruises and a completely broken spine.

He cried out to the Lord, “Why, God? Why have I been cursed so?”

But the Lord was browsing Redtube and did not hear him.

A week later Fermented Bovine Urine gave Derek a hug, and Derek was pleased for he knew that his life was filled with love and joy! He praised the Lord for his blessings and marvelled in the wonder of his glory.

Patrick, though he could no longer move, asked Greg for a hug, but the beetle mistook his words and stabbed him with a used needle. He contracted aides, and cancer of the aides and was stoned to death for being a homosexual by the members of his church. 

In his final moments he cried out to the Lord, “Why, God? Why have you blessed my brother so and cursed me when my weevil was greater?”

But though the Lord could hear him, he was disinterested in Patrick and neglected him out of indifference.

You see, my children, there is a moral here. You must always choose the lesser of two weevils.
i before e except after c Great, now how am I supposed to spell "ice" again?
If I had a bookstore I'd make the mystery section really hard to find

(Credits: Demetri Martin)
3 legged Dog A 3 legged dog walks into an old western salon, looks around, and says "I'm lookin' for the man who shot my paw."
(Long) A 75 yr old man walks into a crowded waiting room There's nothing worse than a Doctor's Receptionist who insists you tell her what is wrong with you, in a room full of other patients. I know most of us have experienced this, and I love the way this old guy handled it.
A 75-year-old man walked into a crowded waiting room and approached the desk. The Receptionist said, 'Yes sir, what are you seeing the Doctor for today?' 
'There's something wrong with my dick', he replied. 
The receptionist became irritated and said, 'You shouldn't come into a crowded waiting room and say things like that.'
'Why not, you asked me what was wrong and I told you,' he said. 
The Receptionist replied; 'Now you have caused some needless embarrassment in this room full of people. You should have said there is something wrong with your ear or something and discussed the problem further with the Doctor in private.' 
The man replied, 'You should not ask people questions in a roomful of strangers if the answer could embarrass anyone.' The man then decided to walk out, waited several minutes and then re-entered. 
The Receptionist smiled smugly and asked, 'Yes??' 
'There's something wrong with my ear,' he stated loudly.
The Receptionist nodded approvingly and smiled, knowing he had taken her advice. 'What is wrong with your ear, Sir?' 
'I can't piss out of it,' he replied. 
The waiting room erupted in laughter
Today I witnessed an amputee being hanged. I tried to save him, but yelled out all the wrong letters.

(H/T Demetri Martin)
What's the difference between cows and bulls? It takes longer to milk the bull. 
I told my doctor I was having trouble sleeping I told my doctor I was having trouble sleeping and he suggested I try white noise. Unfortunately not only did it make my sleep worse, I've also had *Mmmm Bop* stuck in my head now for the last three days.
A black man, a Mexican, a Muslim and a hillbilly are all playing Russian Roulette together. Who is guaranteed to win? Society.
So I bought a Galaxy Note 7 today.. This phone is the bomb
Two sisters There were once two sisters, one called Petal and one called Fridge. One day, Petal asks her parents, "Why did you call me Petal?" and they replied "Because just after you were born, a petal fell on you."

"Bllaaarrarararraraaarg", says Fridge from the corner.





Edit: neat, near the top of /r/jokes frontpage! That's, cool, thanks! 

And yeah, there's a few versions of this, but I found I had posted this as my status on Facebook about 6 years ago (along with a statement that I had woken up my sleeping ex haha) and was reminded of it in memories. Got a chuckle from my past self and thought I'd see if I could do the same for you guys! 
I don't know why my mom keeps telling me to stop watching 'fucking anime' It's called 'hentai'.
A family meal There's a family with two children. They are sitting at the table, eating spaghetti with tomato sauce.

Suddenly, the mom says: "whoops, i spilled the sauce on my shirt. Ted, help me wash it...", while she winks.
The father gets the point and says: "oh, what a mess. Let's go to the bathroom".

One of the two kids follows them without being seen, then he takes a look through the peephole of the bathroom door. He sees his parents having sex.

The next day, the family is eating their lunch again.
The other kid almost spills the sauce on his t-shirt. So his brother says: "man, be careful, or dad's gonna fuck you in the ass"

What did Billy, the boy with no arms, get for Christmas? A baseball mitt.

Actually, he hasn't opened it yet.

Knock Knock

Who's there?

Not Billy
I asked my french girlfriend whether she wanted a golden shower... Oui.
How do you titillate an ocelot? You oscillate it's tit a lot
If I had a dollar for everytime I have sex I could afford a lot of things With my welfare checks.
What did one saggy t*t say to the other saggy t*t? If we don't get some support soon, people will think we're nuts! 
A drunk man gets into the bus and sees a woman who doesn't like to shave her armpits... Then, the drunk man started to stare at her and yell :

" Ballerina, ballerina !  " 

After some time, she got mad and said :

" I'm not a ballerina, why on earth you are saying this ?"

He answered :

"Oh you aren't ? So how is your leg up like this ?"
Easiest Way Of Getting Married 
Couple Fears The Day When They Have To Ask Permission For Marriage From Their Parents. But With This Method, You Can Make Sure The Answer Will Never Be No.


A Boy Asked His Girlfriend’s Dad,

Boy: “Its Just A Formality, But I Still Want To Ask You. Can I Marry Your Daughter?”

The Dad Gets Shocked And Asks: “Who Said Its Just A Formality?”

The Boy Replies: “The Gynecologist.”
Why did the old lady fall in the well? She couldn't see that well
A Very Important Circular From God: A Very Important Circular From God:

“Laying On Bed With Somebody & Screaming,

Oh My God, Oh My God, Oh My God,

Will Not Be Considered As Prayer.”
Two Germans walk into a bar... I forget the punchline, but I know it was heilarious.
Confucius says... It is good to meet girl in park
but BETTER to park meat in girl
Knock Knock Who's there?
I am...
I am who?
You don't know who you are? 
Need more lines for this song Twerkle twerkle little star
Seent you from across the bar

The rest has yet to be created. Help a brother out!!
A confused boy asks his father about sex "Daddy, what's in between Mommy's legs?" the boy asks.

"Paradise, son." replies the dad. 

The boy takes a minute to think, then asks "Daddy, what about your legs? What's in between those?" 

"They key to paradise, son."

"Well, you better change the lock because the neighbor's got a copy."
What's the difference between oral sex and anal sex? Oral sex makes your whole  day, anal sex makes your hole weak.
A man and a frog One evening a man was taking a walk and was passing by a pet store. The pet store owner was stand in front holding a large frog. 
As the man was passing, "Hey Mr. You want to buy this frog?" "No. I don't want to buy that frog"
Store owner says " This frog will give you the best blow job you ever had. If not, I will refund all your monet"
So the man buys the frog. What man could pass the chance for the best blow job.
Later that same evening, new frog owner's wife comes home.
She sees her husband in the kitchen. On the floor. Pots and pans all over the floor. Cook books open. Her husband and the frog. 
Wife says, "Just what the hell are you doing?"
Husband looks up and says" If I can teach this frog to cook, you are out of here bitch!!"

I told my gf she'd look hotter with her hair back. Apparently, that is an insensitive thing to say to a cancer patient.

I don't know why she's so upset, I'm the one that's gotta find a new girlfriend.

She has her whole life to get her hair back, I only have 153 days until Valentine's Day.

(Combined 2 jokes I heard plus added the last part).
I like my women like I like my wine Eight years old and locked up in a cellar
I'm a solipsist... And honestly I'm the smartest person I know.
I have tried every position possible. Even indisposition. 
If I had a dollar If I had a dollar for every time an idea got shot down in the meeting because "We don't have the budget", I would finally have the money to execute that idea.
What did the super-strong chlorella ask the moderately-weak chlorella? Do you even algae-bruh?
If you know this one than we are probably friends. * Man 1: Knock Knock.
* Man 2: Who’s there?
* Man 1: KGB.
* Man 2: KGB wh- *get’s slapped*
* Man 1: WE WILL ASK THE QUESTIONS!


Jokes so Bad that They're Funny The midget psychic broke out of prison. He was a small medium at large.

A boiled egg in the morning is really hard to beat.

Newspaper headline reads: Cartoonist found dead at home. Details are sketchy.

I once heard a joke about amnesia, but I forget how it goes.

Here's a poem by a dog (Bo Burnham): Roses are grey, violets are another shade of grey, let's go chase cars.

The frustrated cannibal threw up his hands.

What did the cannibal get when he showed up to the party late? A cold shoulder.

(I'll see myself out.)
How did Rihanna find out Chris Brown was cheating on her? She found another woman's lipstick on his knuckles. 
I'm a simple mathematician... I see 281x285, I like.
Three guys go skiing Three guys go to a ski lodge, and there aren't enough rooms, so they have to share a bed. In the middle of the night, the guy on the right wakes up and says, "I had this wild, vivid dream of getting a hand job!" The guy on the left wakes up, and unbelievably, he's had the same dream, too. Then the guy in the middle wakes up and says, "That's funny, I dreamed I was skiing!" 
A man's friend helps him build a house.. Man : Thanks so much dude.

Friend : Don't mansion it.
Did you hear about the 120-pound guy with the 60-pound ballsack? People say he was half-nuts!

I was gonna make a pun... But the stress of making them is unbearable.
I bought a high end stereo with a broken volume knob for $10. I couldn't turn it down. 
Suicide Bomber in a forest If a suicide bomber blows himself up in a forest and no one is around to hear it, does he yell "allahu akbar"?
What did the pencil say? Nevermind, it's pointless.
I would like to see G Bush on comedy roast. I would like to see G Bush on comedy roast. But then I remember Bush's best roast was on 9/11. It didn't bring the house down, it brought two buildings down.
Two Italian Men Get On A Bus.... They sit down and engage in an animated conversation. The lady sitting behind them ignores them at first, but her attention is galvanized when she hears one of the men say the following:
"Emma come first. Den I come. Den two asses come together. I come once-a-more. Two asses, they come together again. I come again and pee twice. Then I come one lasta time."
"You foul-mouthed swine," retorted the lady indignantly. "In this country we don't talk about our sex lives in public!"
"Hey, coola down lady," said the man. "Who talkin' abouta sexa? I'm a justa tellin' my frienda how to spella 'Mississippi'."
What do you give lactose intolerant Jews? Zyklon-Brie

(Was drunk in a field at 1 am, friends telling cheese jokes, had a few hits and misses, thought of this one, reactions were a very mixed bag...)
Doctors are so expensive, That that always make me cough it up!
Comas can really change the meaning of a sentence.. For example
"Ben is in a hurry."
"Ben is in a coma."
Where did Sally go when the bomb went off? *Everywhere*
Pokémon should make a Pokémon called ackbar Then it's alolan form would be alola ackbar 
Parrot Joke One day a man went to an auction. While there, he bid on an exotic parrot. He really wanted this bird, so he got caught up in the bidding. He kept on bidding, but kept getting outbid, so he bid higher and higher and higher. Finally, after he bid way more than he intended, he won the bid - the fine bird was finally his! As he was paying for the parrot, he said to the Auctioneer, "I sure hope this parrot can talk. I would hate to have paid this much for it, only to find out that he can't talk!" "Don't worry", said the Auctioneer, "He can talk. Who do you think kept bidding against you?"
Why are they called Nickelback? Because when you go to their concert, you will be asking for your nickel back. 
A blonde, a brunette, and a redhead rob a bank.. A blonde, a brunette, and a redhead decide to rob a bank. Everything goes well-they have their masks on, the bank hands over the money-awesome.

Exiting the bank, they hear sirens and see several cop cars round the corner, so they dash into a small alleyway.

The cops are quick though, and are just about to reach the entrance. There are three empty potato sacks lying against the wall.

"Quick! Hide!" The brunette says, and the three women each crawl into a bag.

A police man comes down the alleyway, looking around for any signs of the women. The potato sacks stick out to him-so he gives the one with the redhead a kick.

"Meow!" goes the redhead, doing her best imitation of a cat.

"Just an alley cat..." The police officer mumbles, moving onto the next bag and delivering a quick nudge with his foot. 

"Woof!" Goes the brunette, imitating a dog.

"Just a stray..." The officer mumbles again, heading to the last bag, and giving it a light kick.

"POOOOE-TAYYY-TOOOEE" grunts the blonde.

_____

Edited to meet popular demand.

For those who don't get the joke, the redhead and brunette both mimic things that might be in an alleyway-a cat and a stray dog. The blonde however wonders "What would be in a potato sack? Potatoes!" and thus tries to blend in by announcing herself as a potato.

Edit Edit: I'm blond. I can make these jokes.
I needed a password eight characters long... ... so I picked Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.


What do you call a dog that can't talk? A malamute.
I fell in love with a stripper once, but she didn't show up for the wedding. Which is a shame, because her cake's still in the freezer.
Roses are red, Violets are blue... I'm colorblind
To expand their business, CNN and NBC build airports. As usual, a lot of things fly over their heads.
I went to a fancy dress party with my friend dressed as the WTC... I couldn't find him anywhere
whats the difference between suicide bombers and space rockets? suicide bombers fly in all directions
As if the Kardashians weren't rich enough... ...now they're robbin' china. (Rob & Chyna)



A Jewish boy asks his dad for 50 dollars... His dad says, "40 dollars?! What do you need 30 dollars for?!!"
I now understand the choice made by Republicans for President Elephants like to Trump
Here is a nice joke i learned Its an old joke my mother once told me. My friends realized it. It just seems to be un avoidable.

Here is the joke

 "My life"
How do you know if someone is dirty? They've got dirt on them.
Punctuation matters The panda eats shoots and leaves. 

The panda eats, shoots and leaves. 

#thuglifepanda
I accidentally ran over and killed my neighbor's cat today... I was too scared to tell him to his face, so I left a note saying "curiosity was here."
My Pet Mouse Elvis Died Today He got caught in a trap. 
How do Muslims like to make their pizzas spicy? They add halalapeño.
Use chemicals to remove polish and no one cares.. But use chemicals to remove Polish and you're literally Hitler.
My friend recently took her dog in to be groomed... I guess she felt like he needed a wife.
Wells Fargo is taken to court by the US government... ...for secretly opening accounts for their customers. Right before the case the governement prosecutor suddenly goes missing. The government suspects that they have an unaccounted sollicitor on account of unsollicited accounts.
My electronegativity class in college was such a blow off class! I got an F on all my exams for the class, but I still managed to maintain a 4.0 GPA.
Goony Bird After many years of marriage, a husband has turned into a couch potato, became completely inattentive to his wife and sat guzzling beer and watching TV all day. The wife was dismayed because no matter what she did to attract the husband's attention, he'd just shrug her off with some bored comment.

This went on for many months and the wife was going crazy with boredom. Then one day at a pet store, the wife saw this big, ugly, snorting bird with a hairy chest, powerful hairy forearms, beady eyes and dribble running down the side of its mouth.

The shopkeeper, observing her fascination with the bird, told her it was a special imported "Goony bird" and it had a very peculiar trait. To demonstrate, he exclaimed, "Goony bird! The table!"

Immediately, the Goony bird flew off its perch and with single-minded fury attacked the table and smashed it into a hundred little pieces with its powerful forearms and claws! To demonstrate some more, the shopkeeper said, "Goony bird! The shelf!"

Again the Goony bird turned to the shelf and demolished it in seconds.

"Wow!" said the wife, "If this doesn't attract my husband's attention, nothing will!" So she bought the bird and took it home.

When she entered the house, the husband was, as usual, sprawled on the sofa guzzling beer and watching the game. "Honey!" she exclaimed, "I've got a surprise for you! A Goony bird!"

The husband, in his usual bored tone replied, "Goony Bird, my ass!" 


My dad works as a banker at Wells Fargo. I asked him to open a checking account for me A checking account? What do you need two checking accounts for? Are you sure you want three checking accounts and a saving account? Fine, I'll open four checking accounts, two savings accounts and a line of credit for you.
What did the letter O say to the letter Q? 
"For God's sake man, put some pants on!"
Mommy I got an A "Mommy! Mommy! I got an A" says Tommy to his mommy
"So what? You still have cancer!" says mommy

I recently switched from Wells Fargo to a credit union... ...my banking got much simpler - bye all accounts.
[Siri Beta] What do you get when you cross a kangaroo with an alien? A mars-upial
What does Tim Cook have for breakfast in the morning? Not Apple Jacks
My friend just became an auditor.. It seems like taxing work 
On a bus one day..... .....a man was sitting next to a woman who was trying to breast-feed her child. The child however refuses to suck on the breast. 

Being frustrated, the mother threatens the child, "If you don't suck on, I will give it to the man next to us!" The child still refuses to oblige. After about 10 minutes of failed effort to get her child to breastfeed, the woman threatens her child again.

Finally the man clears his throat and says, "Look here woman, you better make up your mind. I was supposed to get off 6 stops ago!"
Dr. Leibnitz will be missing on this opening day of the International Cardiologists Symposium: He had a change of heart.
The Bouncer An Afghan, an Albanian, an Algerian, an American, an Andorran, an Angolan, an Antiguans, an Argentine, an Armenian, an Australian, an Austrian, an Azerbaijani, a Bahamian, a Bahraini, a Bangladeshi, a Barbadian, a Barbudans, a Batswanan, a Belarusian, a Belgian, a Belizean, a Beninese, a Bhutanese, a Bolivian, a Bosnian, a Brazilian, a Brit, a Bruneian, a Bulgarian, a Burkinabe, a Burmese, a Burundian, a Cambodian, a Cameroonian, a Canadian, a Cape Verdean, a Central African, a Chadian, a Chilean, a Chinese, a Colombian, a Comoran, a Congolese, a Costa Rican, a Croatian, a Cuban, a Cypriot, a Czech, a Dane, a Djibouti, a Dominican, a Dutchman, an East Timorese, an Ecuadorean, an Egyptian, an Emirian, an Equatorial Guinean, an Eritrean, an Estonian, an Ethiopian, a Fijian, a Filipino, a Finn, a Frenchman, a Gabonese, a Gambian, a Georgian, a German, a Ghanaian, a Greek, a Grenadian, a Guatemalan, a Guinea-Bissauan, a Guinean, a Guyanese, a Haitian, a Herzegovinian, a Honduran, a Hungarian, an I-Kiribati, an Icelander, an Indian, an Indonesian, an Iranian, an Iraqi, an Irishman, an Israeli, an Italian, an Ivorian, a Jamaican, a Jap, a Jordanian, a Kazakhstani, a Kenyan, a Kittian and Nevisian, a Kuwaiti, a Kyrgyz, a Laotian, a Latvian, a Lebanese, a Liberian, a Libyan, a Liechtensteiner, a Lithuanian, a Luxembourger, a Macedonian, a Malagasy, a Malawian, a Malaysian, a Maldivan, a Malian, a Maltese, a Marshallese, a Mauritanian, a Mauritian, a Mexican, a Micronesian, a Moldovan, a Monacan, a Mongolian, a Moroccan, a Mosotho, a Motswana, a Mozambican, a Namibian, a Nauruan, a Nepalese, a New Zealander, a Nicaraguan, a Nigerian, a Nigerien, a North Korean, a Northern Irishman, a Norwegian, an Omani, a Pakistani, a Palauan, a Palestinian, a Panamanian, a Papua New Guinean, a Paraguayan, a Peruvian, a Pole, a Portuguese, a Qatari, a Romanian, a Russian, a Rwandan, a Saint Lucian, a Salvadoran, a Samoan, a San Marinese, a Sao Tomean, a Saudi, a Scottish, a Senegalese, a Serbian, a Seychellois, a Sierra Leonean, a Singaporean, a Slovakian, a Slovenian, a Solomon Islander, a Somali, a South African, a South Korean, a Spaniard, a Sri Lankan, a Sudanese, a Surinamer, a Swazi, a Swede, a Swiss, a Syrian, a Taiwanese, a Tajik, a Tanzanian, a Togolese, a Tongan, a Trinidadian or Tobagonian, a Tunisian, a Turkish, a Tuvaluan, a Ugandan, a Ukrainian, a Uruguayan, a Uzbekistani, a Venezuelan, a Vietnamese, a Welshman, a Yemenite, a Zambian and a Zimbabwean all go to a nightclub.

The doorman stops them and says, ‘Sorry, I can’t let you in without a Thai.’
Why did the Muslim cross the road? His dick was stuck in the goat
I had my stag do in Amsterdam. To remember the occasion my mates got me a sweater. I'd have preferred a moaner or a screamer, however.
What's the difference between a Warlock and a Sorcerer? Apart from the Spelling?
Why is your nose in the middle of your face? because it's the scenter.
I started working as a barista. They let me take home free bags of coffee. Just one of the perks of the job.
Knock Knock Knock knock

Who's there?

Daisy

Daisy who?

DAISY ME ROLLING, THEY HATING
Why did Hitler blows his brains out?... Because he saw his gas bill.  

Also this joke isn't funny, one of my family members died in a concentration camp.

He went to take a piss and fell out of a tower. 
A man sees a boy smoking and drinking A man walks home late at night, and suddenly saw an 8-year old boy with a smoking cigarette, drinking from a half-empty bottle of scotch. Outraged, he screams at the kid:  

"What the hell are you doing? Those things are very bad for you health, and you're far too young to even consider this!"  

"My grandfather lived to 100 years", - replies the kid nonchalantly.  

"Err, and did he smoke and drink all the time?" - asks the confused man.  

"No, he always minded his own business".
Charles XII of Sweden, Darius of Persia and Napoleon are sitting at a bar. Charles XII of Sweden, Darius of Persia and Napoleon are sitting at a bar, watching a military parade on CNN. 
 Impressed by modern technology Charles XII says - "Man, if i had mechanised infratry like that I'd have kicked ass at the Poltava battle."

 Darius replies - "And if i had artillery like that the Greeks wouldn't stand a chance at the battle of Marathon."

 Napoleon sighs and says - "And if I had a propaganda machine like the CNN nobody would have found out about the Waterloo."
What's the name of the elite hacking group from Canada? Anonymoose
Why was Jack scared? Because Jack was bean stalked
How does a paralympian call home, after winning a medal? handsfree
How do you organize a party in space? You planet!
Grapes.. What did the green grape say to the purple grape?.. BREATHE IDIOT, BREATHE. 
A woman was breastfeeding in the bus the other day ...And suddenly, this old lady gets up and starts screaming "you can't do that here, have you no shame? in front of everyone???".

Everybody turns around, the old lady keeps screaming, the woman with her baby stands here mortified...

...I had to pull my pants back up and get off the bus...
I asked my girlfriend if she wanted to take part in a rape fantasy She screamed NO!!

I said thats the spirit

Who else have gone through this Sarcasm? Me: Baby, I was thinking about you so sending you **kiss**

She: Thanks for Thinking
Why is a miscarriage like a shitty pizza? They're both cold upon delivery.
Ukraine are currently third in the Paralympics table, reaping the rewards of their investment programme... ...Or as we know it, 'Chernobyl 1986'
New Bike **This is NOT an original. My brother sent me this joke this morning as I have recently bought a bike.**
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
A guy decides to buy a new Harley. Before he leaves the owner tells him his secret for keeping it in such great condition is he rubs vaseline on the chrome when it rains and hands him a jar of vaseline. 

Over weekend, he decides to take his new bike to visit his girlfiends'  parents. 

As they walk to the front door she stops him and says, "Don't talk during dinner, the first one to talk has to do the dishes." 

He says "Alright?" 

Still confused they get to the front door and walk in only to find piles of dishes all over the house. They start to eat and sure enough nobody is saying a word. 

So he starts to rub his girlfriends breast, still nothing from anybody. He takes off her clothes, still nothing from anybody. Then He screws her right their at the table, not a word from anybody. A little more time goes by and he does the same thing to her mom, still no word from anybody. 

Then he hears it starting to rain outside so he pulls out the jar of vaseline to take care of his bike. 

Her dad says, "Alright, alright I will do the dishes."

I had to get a restraining order from my dad. He wouldn't stop taking my picture Damn pop-arazzi.
Trust In God, Always There Was A Flood In A Village.

One Man Said To Everyone: “I’ll Stay! God Will Save Me!”
The Flood Got Higher And A Boat Came And The Man In It Said: “Come On Mate, Get In!”

“No, God Will Save Me!” Replied The Man.

The Flood Got Very High Now And The Man Had To Stand On The Roof Of His House.

A Helicopter Soon Came And The Man Offered Him Help.

“No, God Will Save Me!” He Said

Eventually He Died By Drowning.

He Got By The Gates Of Heaven And He Said To God: “Why Didn’t You Save Me?”

God Replied: “For Goodness Sake! I Sent A Boat And A Helicopter. What More Do You Want!“

What did the professor say to the sexy girl who studied the planets and stars? You have an incredible asstronomy career ahead of you. 
Doctor's have ruled out one type of pneumonia as the cause of Hillary's health problems. Walking pneumonia
Why is it a bad idea for two butt cheeks to get married? Because they part for every little shit. Why is it a bad idea for two butt cheeks to get married? Because they part for every little shit
Two Prostitutes (Kim & Chloe) walking down the street at night.... Kim says to Chloe, "Wait, someone is coming over." Chloe surprised and asks, "How can you tell? Its so dark out here." Kim explains, "You know I have this gift of smelling dick from a far." Chloe laughs and says, "No silly, I just burped."
why do gorillas have such big nostrils? because they have big fingers
I heard Hillary paid a touching tribute at the 9/11 memorial... ...she collapsed.
Rick and Jerry went hunting Rick and Jerry, after 2 days of tracking a buck, made their way into a clearing. both men are exhausted, getting little sleep during their expedition, and Rick decides that after the last 9 straight hours in the bush, he deserves to take a much needed bathroom break. after Jerry had finished gutting the buck, he realized that an hour had passed since Rick had left the clearing. worried, Jerry walked into the forest and found Rick, back against a tree and sitting as if in a chair. he had fallen asleep while he was taking a dump. Jerry, coming up with a great practical joke, runs back to the clearing and grabs the entrails. after getting back to Rick, he put the guts under Rick's backside. Jerry then walked back to their belongings and fired his rifle, and waited. Rick comes back to the clearing 5 minutes later, looking proud. Jerry, laughing to himself, asks, "so what took you so long?"
"well, I fell asleep while I was pooping and I musta pooped my guts out. but with luck on my side, and a little help from a stick, I got 'em all back in!"
To the guy in the wheelchair who stole my camouflage jacket: You can hide, but can't run!
What's the difference between a baby and a trampoline? I take my shoes off before jumping on a trampoline
Where do you weigh a whale? At a whale weigh station
A man walks into a bar and says, "I'm a man." He meets a woman at the bar.

He says, "I'm a man."

He takes the woman home

He says, "I'm a man."

He takes her to bed.

He says, "I'm a man."

He asks her name

She says **I'm a man!**
guess what chicken butt

*goteem*
A man buys himself a motorbike one day, as this was a long life dream of his... The salesman gives him a tip, before letting him take off on his newly acquired vehicle; "if you apply Vaseline on it before it rains, it will protect the shine of the paint." The man stops at a local convenience store, and buys a jar of Vaseline for future use; which he puts inside his jacket's pocket.  
  
He cruises the city for hours on his bike, and even picks up this sexy, quirky chick, and brings her for a ride. She gets him to drop her at home, and invites him in for dinner... "We have 1 rule of the house sort of thing. The first persons who talks, while within the confine of the house has to do the dishes."  
  
They enter the house, and dirty dishes lay everywhere. The living room is full of hem, the hallway, the kitchen (aside from the dinner table)... They sit down to eat, and there were 4 persons at the the table. The mother, the sister, the lady he had given a ride to, and the father. The mother starts playing footsies with him under the table, and things get uncomfortable. He grabs the mother, throws her on the table, and fucks her brains out. The sister rips her shirt open, he grabs her throws her on the table and fucks her. The other woman looks at him with a smile, and fucks her on the table as well. Nobody, through all of this, uttered anything even close to being a word.  
   
After all that, the biker looks outside, and it's starting to drizzle out there. He takes out his jar of Vaseline pensively, and the father starts to shout, "ok, ok, I'll do the fucking dishes!"
today funny joke What do politicians and diapers have in common?
-
Both should be changed regularly, and both for the same reason.

"My body, my choice" -Hilary Clinton, 11 September 2016
I've just de-flowered a virgin. I mugged a Pokemon Go player coming out of a florists.
Why can't orphans play baseball? They don't know where home is.
Paul has a shitty life... Paul has a shitty life, his wife constantly berates him, his job sucks, his boss is a bully, his car is a shitty 85 ford pinto with a cracked windshield and is in bad need of a new transmission and to top it all off he's chubby, balding, and he has a small penis. 

The only thing good in Paul's life is his friend Artie.  Artie isn't the brightest bulb in the world, but he's always been there for Paul in the tough times. On October 5, 1953 Artie stood up for Paul against his bully in 7th grade.  Artie got his ass handed to him at that time, but so did Paul. That incident resulted in a life long friendship.  Paul and Artie went to the same High School together. They traveled around Europe that one summer in college. Artie was Paul's best man at his wedding. Everyone thought speech Artie gave was terrible, But Paul loved it Artie was his best friend.

Artie's life wasn't much better either, he never had the smarts for that great Job.  In fact he was stuck in a dead end job as a construction labourer. Artie's car was pretty shitty too. Artie never married, but he was happy in the knowledge that at least he didn't end up with Paul's shitty wife.

For Paul's 46th birthday Artie was pretty broke, so all he could get his friend was a single lottery ticket. Artie being the sentimental guy that he was picked the date of the start of their friendship, and their respective ages (46, 45).  Paul loved the present, and thought that the two of them should go to the Legion that friday to split a round of beers and listen to them call out the numbers.  

On Friday they are both sitting there at the Legion having a laugh over a couple of beers when the cute lottery girl comes on the t.v. to read out the numbers.  Paul pulls out the ticket and spreads it out on the beer stained table in front of them.  The lottery girl starts reading out the numbers, 45, 10, 05.  Both of Paul and Artie's hearts start beating, thats 200$ already.  53, Holy crap thats like a 10, 000 ticket. They both start losing their shit. 46....... Paul feints.  He just won the jackpot. 37million dollars.  

Two minutes later Artie finally revives Paul. Paul and Artie celebrate the night away, buy round after round for the people at the Legion and get absolutely shittered. They close out the bar and as the ugly lights come on they stumble blitzed, singing, onto the street arm in arm with the winning lottery ticket in hand and start the long walk back to Paul's place.

Halfway home, Paul comes to two drunken conclusions: 1. he has to share the winnings with his friend Artie 50/50, and 2. His bitch of a wife ain't gonna let that happen. Paul decides to share this epiphany with Artie and the two of them sit down to figure out this problem, and after about a half hour the only conclusion that they can come to is Paul's Wife has got to go.

Artie being the good friend that he is tells Paul that he is willing to take care of the little problem himself, Artie never really liked Paul's wife anyway.  But Artie being the legal genius that he is wants to have some assurance that Paul is still gonna follow through his side of the plan and wants a contract. Paul agrees and pulls out the only piece of paper in his wallet, a one dollar bill and "Pays" Artie to off his wife.  And they come up with a plan.

40 min later the 2 of them drunkenly stumble through Paul's front door only to find Paul's wife up in the living room. She immediatly starts yelling "WHERE THE FUCK HAVE YOU BEEN?!" "WHY ARE YOU SO DRUNK?"...... on and on she yells until finishes with "WELL IF YOU TWO ARE SUCH GOOD BUDDYS THEN YOU CAN SLEEP TOGETHER FOR ALL I CARE!" and slams the door to the bedroom.  They both look at each other, smirk, then immediately pass out on the couches.  

The next day Paul awakes to find Artie gone, Artie knows better then to be found on the couch by Paul's wife in the morning.  Paul wakes with the biggest hangover that he has EVER experienced, but Paul knows that this day is this is the first day of a new life for him. His wife of course is in her typical mood, but Paul placates her all day with "yes, dear", "Of course, Dear", "I'll get right on it Dear." All the while feeling like crap.  That evening Paul puts his plan into motion and he begs his wife to go to the Safeway to pick up some pain killers and pepto for his still lingering hangover. Because he has been soo compliant all day his wife reluctantly goes. Little does she know this is the last shopping trip she will ever make. Paul quickly texts Artie "It's a go".

While Paul's wife is shopping in the Safeway Artie sneaks into the back seat of Paul's wife's Car and waits for her.  When paul's wife finally gets done with the shopping and gets out to the car, Artie pops up from the hiding place and grabs her around the neck and starts choking her to death.  At one point Artie thinks to himself this is taking way longer then it does in the movies. All the while she is violently twitching and struggling in the front seat. Eventually she succumbs to the strength Artie built up over all those years of construction labour.  

Little does Artie know, but the store manager 35 year old Freddie has seen everything happen on the security cameras and has called the cops and ran outside to try to stop what Artie has done. Yet Freddie arrives just a little too late, in fact just as Artie is about to make his escape.

Artie, realizing that he has been seen by this guy running towards the car knows that he has to do something to get away, so he sprints to Freddie and with one swing knocks him out. Artie then full of fear and panic gets on top of Freddie and chokes him to death as well.  Unfortunately for Artie and Paul this gives the police time to arrive and Arrest him.

The next day the paper lands on Paul's doorstep with the headline "Artie Chokes two for a dollar at Safeway" 

Show me a prostitute that is happy being paid in information about past events... ...and I'll show you a whore that'll go down in history.
What do you give a man who has everything? Penicillin
I caught a rather portly woman staring at me yesterday. When I asked if she was okay, she told me that she was looking for her other half. If only half of her was there, she must weigh in excess of 300 pounds. She should see a dietician. 
I know it's crazy to think that every time I have deja vu, it's actually happened before, but... I know it's crazy to think that every time I have deja vu, it's actually happened before, but...
Tattoos are like Women Frowned upon in the eyes of the Lord.
If there was an Avengers adaptation of snow white, the magic mirror would point to Iron Man Because he was the ferrous of them all.
What fruit did Hillary grind up in her juicer? 13 blackberries and 5 apples
A man wanted me to engage in necrophilia... NSFW I told him to drop dead
If a guy says you're hot, he's looking at your body. If he says you're pretty, he's looking at your face... If he says you're fabulous, he's looking at your brother
The Nokia 3310 was ahead of its time... Dust proof, water proof, had a nearly infinite battery life, indestructible, AND no audio jack!
How do Mexicans cut their pizza? Little Caesars
A man walks into a bar With a piece of asfalt in his hand, goes to the bartender and says "Ill take 2 beers, one for me and one for the road"
What is the best pickup line for Rwandans? "Congratulations! Your parents survived the genocide!"
I usually don't eat asparagus... Because it makes your pee taste funny
My dick is like the Boogeyman (NSFW) It scares children
Why did the elephant sit on the marshmallow? Because it did not want to sink into the hot chocolate.
Nithe lookin horth... A guy calls his buddy the horse rancher and says he's sending a friend over to look at a horse. 

His buddy asks "How will I recognize him?" "That's easy, he's a midget with a speech impediment." 

So, the midget shows up, and the guy asks him if he's looking for a male or female horse. "A female horth." So he shows him a prized filly. 

"Nithe lookin horth. Can I thee her eyeth?" So the guy picks up the midget and he gives the horse's eyes the once over. 

"Nithe eyeth, can I thee her earthz"? So he picks the 
little fella up again, and shows him the horse's ears. 

"Nithe earthz, can I thee her mouf?" The rancher is gettin' pretty pissed off by this point, but he picks Him up again and shows him the horse's mouth. 

"Nithe mouf, can I thee her twat"? Totally mad as fire at this point, the rancher grabs him under his arms and rams the midget's head as far as he can up the horse's twat, pulls him out and slams him on the ground. 

The midget gets up, sputtering and coughing. "Perhapth I should wephwase that; Can I thee her wun awound a widdlebit?"
I support Colin Kaepernick but I don't want to buy his jersey... I'd rather have a #7 seat cushion instead.  It would let you take a principled stand by sitting down *and* it would help keep the bench warm.

Just like Colin Kaepernick.
What kind of gardening is done in the hood? Weeding
What do you call a boy with no arms and legs in the middle of the ocean? Bobby
What's the best pokemon in pokemon go? It's Victreebel if you go to a gym you will always get a victory with it.
Women are like locks and men are like keys A key that can open many locks is a master key. A lock that can be opened by many keys is a shitty lock
What is the design philosophy of the iPhone 7? Jack off
You know what's the common thing between iPhone 7 and the board on Titanic? There is no room for Jack
What's the difference between a redneck, and a SJW? A redneck's trigger actually does something
Wrong Synonyms It is Thanksgiving Day and a family is preparing dinner awaiting the arrival of the children's grandparents. Thomas, who is four is running around looking for is new pair of grey socks. He ventures up to the washroom where his mother is putting makeup on. Not realizing the boy is there she yells "shit" when she accidentally gets makeup in her eyes. Never hearing the word before, the boy asks her, "Mommie, what does shit mean?" 

The mother quickly replies, "Shit is just another word for makeup dear." 

Thomas then asks his mom if she knows where his socks are and she tells him to go downstairs and ask his father. 

The boy's father is stuffing the turkey when he cuts his finger by mistake. He says "fuck." The boy asks him if he's seen his socks and the father tells him to go look in his sister's room. Before the boy leaves he asks his father what fuck means and the father says "stuff". "Like stuffing a turkey." 

The boy goes to his sister's room and finally finds his socks in the bedroom and puts them on just as the doorbell rings. Thomas runs down the stairs and opens the door. He greets his grandparents by saying "Hello grandma and grandpa, mommie is upstairs putting shit on her face and daddy is in the kitchen fucking the turkey."
Jesus and his 12 disciples walk into a bar Christ says to the barman "13 glasses of tap water please"
How do you get a fire started? You burn some fagots

Look up the definition before commenting/down voting...
Give a man a fire, and he'll be warm for a night. Set a man on fire, and he'll be warm for the rest of his life.

Credit: Philip J. Fry
I was on this plane once. And I'm sittin' there and the captain comes on and he does his whole, "We'll be cruising at 35,000 feet," then he puts the mike down but he forgets to turn it off. Then he turns to the copilot and goes, "You know, all I could go for right now is a fuckin' blow job and a cup of coffee." So the stewardess fuckin' goes bombin' up from the back of the plane to tell him the mic's still on, and this guy behind me goes, "Hey hon, don't forget the coffee!"
What's the similarity between a school shooter and a person who killed someone while praying in a church They will both be called Mass Murderers
The woman next to me on this rollercoaster won't stop screaming. Its like she's never seen a penis before.
What do you call a steak that is a girl? Miss.Steak
I created a new word Plagiarism

*just like 80% of the jokes on this page wink wink*
What do you call a Jamaican proctologist? Dr. Pokemon.
What is the only law that Hillary obeys? The law of gravity
You can have the Johnson Why would you want the left nut, or the right nut, when you can have the Johnson...?
Why are dad jokes harmless and mom jokes offensive? I'll tell you when you're older
My girlfriend asked me to stop singing The Monkees. I thought she was lying, but then I saw her face... 
People with Down's Syndrome have a 35 - 50% chance of passing on the genetic disorder to any offspring they have. So if they reproduce are they... doubling downs?
I just got a really terrible circumcision What a rip-off!
An old Russian goes ice fishing One winter this old Russian man is ice fishing on the pond behind his shack. He feels his line tense and he quickly reels it in and finds that he's hooked a muddy lamp. As he's wiping the muck off, a genie pops out and tells him it'll grant him three wishes.

"If this is so", replies the old Russian, "I will have cup of finest vodka in World"

Poof! A mug of vodka appears before his eyes. He quickly grabs the cup and tosses it back.

"Amazing! I wish this whole pond filled with finest vodka!"

The genie snaps his fingers and bids the man to drink. The Russian scoops some up through the ice and finds that the pond has indeed turned into the most delicious vodka he's ever tasted. He spends the next several weeks drinking the pond dry.

As he scoops the last drop up from the pond and glugs it down, the genie asks him what he will have for his final wish. The old man pauses for a moment, considering what he should ask for, before replying "I'll have another vodka"
How do you embarrass an archaeologist? Give him a used tampon and ask him which period it came from..
A pregnant woman goes into a coma A pregnant woman goes into a coma moments after she gives birth to twins, one boy and one girl. When she finally wakes up several days later and asks:

Woman: "Doctor, this feels like deja vu. Has this happened to me before?"

Doctor: "Welcome to r/jokes!"
What did one cannibal say to the other when eating a clown? "Hey, does this taste funny to you?"
Vegans who drink water disgust me. That's a Fish's house you filthy Savage. 
I'm sexually attracted to the homeless. I'm hobosexual.
I run a successful sanitary business but my customers are entitled assholes. I guess I shouldn't take so much shit from them.
Trump released medical records from a Gastroenterologist Giving us proof of an "astonishingly excellent" asshole.
I asked a white girl at a bar to try suggesting career choices for me that she would take. She told be to suck on a dick.
What is Hillary Clinton's favorite pizza joint? Little seizures!
My Father was a brick layer before he was sent to prison. To this day he still isn’t a free mason.
How many potatoes does it take to kill an Irishman? None.
A man died today when a pile of books fell on him. He only had his shelf to blame.
Have you seen the new interview of John Cena? Yeah me neither..........
One Liner: With everything that Hillary Clinton says, at least we know she's not Aes Sedai. Because she lies.
Did you hear about corduroy pillows??? They're making headlines!
My memory is flawless But my ability to recall is not great
A man walks into a bar and goes up to the second story He orders a drink called the magic potion, drinks it, and jumps out the window and flies away. The guy who was sitting next to him asks the bartender what drink he had. The bar tender tells him it was the magic potion. The guy orders one, drinks it, and jumps out the window and lands on the ground. The first guy comes back in and the bartender says to him: "Superman, you can be a real jerk sometimes."
I was nervous my first day in, so I walked up to the toughest guy in the cafeteria and knocked him out... but I lost my job as a middle school teacher
What's the best thing about a swimming pool bar? There's never a line for the bathroom. 
I really needed something positive in my life so I finally got tested.

What does Plane + Pentagon equal? Square
I paid full price for the PlayStation version of No Mans Sky And I was completely satisfied with my decision after playing.
An 18 year old Italian girl tells her Mom that she has missed her period for two months.......  Very worried, the mother goes to the drugstore and buys a pregnancy kit. The test result shows that the girl is pregnant. Shouting, cursing, crying, the mother says, "Who was the pig that did this to you? I want to know!" The girl picks up the phone and makes a call.
Half an hour later, a Ferrari stops in front of their house. A mature and distinguished man with gray hair and impeccably dressed in an Armani suit steps out of the of the Ferrari and enters the house.
He sits in the living room with the father, mother, and the girl and tells them: "Good morning, your daughter has informed me of the problem. I can't marry her because of my personal family situation but I'll take charge. I will pay all costs and provide for your daughter for the rest of her life." "Additionally, if a girl is born, I will bequeath a Ferrari, a beach house, two retail stores, a townhouse, a beachfront villa, and a $2,000,000 bank account. If a boy is born, my legacy will be a couple of factories and a $4,000,000 bank account. If twins, they will receive a factory and $2,000,000 each. However, if there is a miscarriage, what do you suggest I do?"

At this point, the father, who had remained silent, places a hand firmly on the man's shoulder and tells him, "You fuck her again."
I was kicked out of the military I was kicked out of the military for being a pussy... They gave me a vaginal discharge
In between her legs A little boy asked his dad whats in between mums legs and he says "It's paradise my boy." "Ok whats in between your legs" and he says "Its the key to paradise." And the boy goes "Well you better get that lock changed because that prick next door has a spare key." 


What should have tipped off the airline ticket sellers on 9/11? When the terrorists asked for anything cheaper than one-way.
What's the hardest part of a vegetable to eat? The wheelchair.
What's the difference between a jeweler and a jailer? One sells watches and one watches cells. 

Credit to DBZ.


Edit: Not sure why this auto flared to religion....
Which is an elephant's favorite day? 9/11 because it never forgets.
I went to a zoo the other day and all they had was a terrier. It was a shih tzu.
How did Cinderella's evil twin lose her slipper? She came down with a case of pneumonia 
What do you call a gorilla that's hair is two different colors? Harambre
A wife and husband are making an important decision Husband: Should we have kids?

Wife: I don't know, there's many factors to consider such as income, education, location, and whether we can be good parents.

Husband: Considering our current situation, I believe that we should not.

Wife: OK, I agree with that statement.

Husband: You heard her, get the hell out of this house!

(Kid 1 and kid 2 are thrown out to the streets)
I mowed the lawn today.... ....and after doing so I sat down and had a cold beer. The day was really quite beautiful, and the drink facilitated some deep thinking.

My wife walked by and asked me what I was doing, and I said, "nothing". The reason I said "nothing" instead of saying "just thinking" is because she then would have asked, "About what?" At that point I would have had to explain that men are deep thinkers about various topics, which would lead to other questions.

Finally I pondered an age old question: Is giving birth more painful than getting kicked in the nuts? Women always maintain that giving birth is way more painful than a guy getting kicked in the nuts, but how could they know?

Well, after another beer, and some more heavy deductive thinking, I have come up with an answer to that question. Getting kicked in the nuts is more painful than having a baby, and even though I obviously couldn't really know, here is the reason for my conclusion. A year or so after giving birth, a woman will often say, "It might be nice to have another child."

On the other hand, you never hear a guy say, "You know, I think I would like another kick in the nuts."

I rest my case. Time for another beer, and then maybe a nap.
A man drives past a farm He looks out in the field and sees a man fucking a sheep. He yells, "Oh, my god, that's sick! I've got to do something!"

He pulls up to the farmhouse, gets out, and knocks on the door. A young man answers.

"Excuse me sir," the man says. "But I think you should know there's a man in your field violating a sheep."

"Oh, yeah," replies the young man. "That's just my daa-a-aad."
After a horrible crime wave, the NYPD put mounted police officers on every street corner in the city. It was an impressive show of horse.
What's your view on lesbians? 1080p
A chef was recently arrested ... A chef was recently arrested for murder and cannibalism after a midget martial artist was found cut into pieces in a stock pot. The chef was later questioned why he did it. 

"I was making a soup and thought it needed a little kick." 
I fan speak a little French I'd like to bon appétit (bone a petite)

Edit: can not fan
A radio station has a word contest... A radio station was running a competition - words that weren't in the dictionary yet could still be used in a sentence that would make logical sense. The prize was a trip to Brazil.


DJ: "99FM here, what's your name?"


Caller: "Hi, my name's Dave."


DJ: "Dave, what's your word?"


Caller: Goan... spelt G-O-A-N, pronounced 'go-an'".


DJ: "You are correct, Dave, 'goan' is not in the dictionary. Now, for a trip to Brazil: What sentence can you use that word in that would make sense?"


Caller: "Goan fuck yourself!"


The DJ cuts the caller short and takes other calls, all unsuccessful until:


DJ: "99FM, what's your name?"


Caller: "Hi, my name's Jeff!"


DJ: "Jeff, what's your word?"


Caller: "Smee... spelt S-M-E-E, pronounced 'smee'."


DJ: "... you are correct, Jeff, 'smee' is not in the dictionary. Now, for a trip to Brazil: What sentence can you use that word in that would make sense?"


Caller: "Smee again! Goan fuck yourself!"
What's red and invisible? No tomatoes.
What's Trump's least favourite vegetable? Cillary!
Notice anything? B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T V W Y Z

Because Apple removed the AUX

*cue snare drum*
Do you know the difference between a garbanzo bean and a chickpea? I've never had a garbanzo bean on my face.
Went to a sausage party It was the wurst. 
[Long, but original] Two brothers are catching up over a drink... The older brother Dave is successful, hard-working and married with a family, a dog and a cat.  The younger brother Mike is a real nice guy, but he's kind of a fuck-up.  Having been too busy to catch up for weeks, they decide to meet up at the local bar.

Dave says, "Man, I'm sorry we haven't done this in a while.  I've been so stressed at work, and to top it off the sitter quits on me one week before I'm supposed to take the wife and kids to Europe.  I don't know how I'm going to arrange for someone to take care of the pets and look after mom with only a week's notice."

Mike says, "Hey, I'm not doing anything next week; let me take care of it for you!"  Dave replies, "That's real nice of you, and don't take this the wrong way... but the last time I asked you to do a favor for me you killed my goldfish.  This is a little more serious than 7th Grade, Mike."

Mike says, "I know I've been a real fuck-up, but hear me out: I've turned over a new leaf.  I'm a different man now, Dave.  I have a steady job, a beautiful girlfriend... I only ever drink a little on the weekends.  Let me do you this favor to make up for all those years of being such a dope."

Dave says, "I really don't like to do this, but I'm in a bind... so against my better judgment, the wife and I would be very appreciative if you would take care of things while we're away.  Thanks for coming through for me Mike."

When he lands in Europe, the first thing Dave does is pick up the phone and dial Mike to see how things are going.  Mike says, "Hey, how ya doin?! ... Listen, I'm really sorry big brother, but the cat is dead."

Dave says, "WHAT?! JESUS CHRIST, I'M NOT EVEN GONE FOR A DAY AND YOU JUST KILLED THE FUCKING CAT! THE WIFE AND KIDS LOVE THAT CAT! WHAT THE HELL DO YOU WANT ME TO TELL THEM?! You know the worst thing, Mike? You didn't even have the decency to let me enjoy my vacation for a single day. At the very least, lie to me, you piece of shit. Tell me the cat is on the roof.  Then the second day say, [bad, angry impression] 'HEY DAVE NOT MUCH GOING ON HERE, YEAH THE CAT'S STILL ON THE ROOF BUT TOMORROW I'M GOING TO CALL THE FIRE DEPARTMENT...' At least drag out my misery, you jackass."

[Long, uncomfortable pause]

Mike says, "Shit Dave, you're absolutely right.  I'm sorry.  I promise, I'm not going to let anything else interrupt the rest of your vacation.  I'll take care of everything and I bet I can even find a cat who looks just like snowball so you don't have to tell the girls anything."

Dave says, "I'm sorry for being so harsh on you little brother.  If you can get me out of this, all is forgiven.  By the way, how's mom doing?"

[Short pause]

Mike says, "Uhhhh, I think mom is on the roof."

Edit: Punctuation
How do you say constipated in german? Farhfrumpoopin'.
Two old guys sit on a park bench One old guy brags: "When I was young, I could bend an iron rod over my erect member!"
The other old guy: "Can you still do that?
The first old guy: "No, my arms are not as strong as they used to be!"
Did you hear about Hillary collapsing? She fell harder than the world Trade Center
I was watching the news this morning when th presenter said... "A man has been arrested after half a million indecent images of children were found at his home in Bradford. Our reporter Gary O'Donoghue has more."
Gary, you filthy bastard.
Other Trump supporters might be racist, but I'm not. My girlfriend's black. But only the area around her eyes where I punch her.
Blondes CAN count sheep So sick of hearing blonde jokes, a blonde cut her long hair and dyed it brown.

The next day she drove out into the countryside where she came upon a flock of sheep crossing the road.
Stopping her car to watch the fluffy flock, she called out to the shepherd, 
"Your sheep are so cute. If I guess how many sheep you have, will you give me one of them?"

The shepherd was taken by the woman's beauty and said to her, "Yes".
So the woman said the first number that came into her head which was "436".
Shocked that she was somehow right, the shepherd said, "That's right. Yes, you can pick one of my flock."

After much thought and study of the flock, the woman selected what she thought was the cutest and most playful one to take home with her.

The shepherd turned to the woman and said, 
"Now I have a proposition for you. If I can guess your real hair colour, can I have my dog back?"
What do you call a lazy kangaroo? A pouch potato. 
What is the skin on you forearm called? Foreskin. Budam tss 
Why are NASCAR drivers good at cunnilingus? Lots of practice laps.
Why did the squirrel swim on it's back? To keep it's nuts dry.
The Old West sheriff and his deputy are searching for the outlaw gang... ... and find them holed up in a cabin in the hills.  The sheriff sends his deputy back to town for help.  Some time later the deputy returns, driving a wagon containing all the girls from the town brothel.  
The sheriff says "Dammit, Earl.  I told you to bring my POSSE."

Hitler wasn't that bad. C'mon, he killed Hitler.
The most expensive ballet is shown six months a year. It's called American Football.
You know the best part about dating a homeless chick? You can drop her off wherever.
I just beat my girlfriend She wants to act like a dick, I'll treat her like a dick
Aren't anesthesiologists such boring people? They put me to sleep. That's for sure.
Parallel lines are so much alike. It's just too bad I've seen this joke reposted so many times to make the punchline.
How many meninists does it take to change a light bulb? none. They don't think it needs to be changed.
I sexually identify as an attack helicopter. Because I explode on impact. 
How can a redneck tell when their sister is on her period? When their father's dick tastes like blood
I have an EpiPen I don't need it but I always keep it for sentimental value. 

A friend of mines gave it to me as he was dying, I don't know why but it seemed very important to him I had it.
A friend once gave me a birthday card, and inside it was a big fat zero. It meant nothing to me.
I always told my mom shes like a lazy baker When it comes to deserts, she doesnt knead any
What is the difference between a used tire and a year supply of used condoms? The first one is a Goodyear and the other is a great year.
My boyfriend has been ignoring me lately so I decided to become a potato that's one way to get him to eat me
A friend told me that all apples were yellow... I was like, "that's bananas"
question of the day... Why do we "take" a piss/dump? What happened to giving? 
What is a savory taste? Umami
What's the difference between a jock and a nerd? One gets blowjobs, the other gets Steve Jobs.
Girl with no arms or legs is sitting overlooking the ocean A man walking past notices she's crying, says "what's wrong girl?" She responds, " I've never been kissed before " the man feels really bad for her and leans in and kisses her and leaves. 
Another guy is walking past and notices the girl is upset and crying, he asks "what's wrong girl?", the girl responds "I've never been fingered before, and I can't even do it myself", the man takes a deep breath,  closes his eyes and starts to finger bash her.
Not long after, another man walks by, notices her crying and says "what's wrong?", the girl responds "it's just, I've never been fucked before".. There man pauses for a while, takes the girl out of her chair and launches her into the ocean and yells "now you're fucked!".
A boat was sunk by a dock.. It succumbed to pier pressure.
What did the lion say to the lamb? I will eat you right me-ow.
What's Hitler's favorite Beatles song? Revolution nein.
mike i got good and bad news So mike's in a waiting room whilst at the hospital when a doctor comes in. "Mike i got good news and bad news what do you want first?" Nervously mike says to the doctor " give me the bad news first doc" to which the doctor replies with " well mike im sorry but we have to amputate both your legs" Mike in disbelief and shock turns around and says " well whats the fucking good news then ?" And the doctor replies " well the patient next door would like to buy your slippers"
I set up an internet page for Chinese Nazis. So far it's got 3 Reichs on Facebook.
What do you and your penis have in common? They're both a dick.
Breadmakers Always looking to prove something.
Want to hear a joke? American politics.
Yo momma's so stupid, that when she heard about 9/11... She thought it was a new gas station.
I shot two camera lenses out of two cannons into each other at high speed... ...I wanted to make a kaleidoscope
A young boy asks him mum why his cousin is named Diamond... His mother replies "because your auntie loves Diamonds"

He replies "what about me?"

She responds "enough question Richard" 
how is life like a penis? Your girlfriend makes it hard

-unless you're unlucky and that's the difference between the two

Dark humor is a lot like a child with cancer. It never gets old.
Princess Dianna had dandruff They found her head and shoulders in the glovebox.
Man: Hi, do you want to dance? Woman: Yeah, sure!
-
Man: Great, go and dance, I want to talk to your pretty friend!


Earth's relationship with Neptune is a meme. The gravity of the situation is 5:7
2 gay guys are living in an apartment complex, when it catches on fire. Who is the first one to get out? The one who has his shit packed
Why did the stick bug go to the hospital? Because he broke a limb!
I was raised by my father.. He was schizophrenic, but he was good people.
What do the World Trade Center and Hillary Clinton have in common? They both fell on 9/11.
There was an earthquake in North Korea It was kim jong un-expected
What do you call masturbating on a plane Hi-jacking




Never forget
An older man is walking down the street when he hears a voice: 'STOP right there or a brick will fall on you'. Sure enough a brick falls right where he would have been had he not been warned. A few minutes later the same voice screams: STOP or you will be run over. A second later a car whizzes by at high speed. The old man looks around but can't see anyone so he shouts: who are you? The voice says 'I am your guardian angel'. The old man looks annoyed and screams: so where the fuck were you on my wedding day?
lisdexia Is a horrible sidease. 
Why are your eyes brown? Because you're full of shit. 
I burnt my Hawaiian pizza last night. I knew should’ve put the oven on aloha setting.
Why should you never wear a watch when you are busy? So that people don't know you have time on your hands
What kind of joke makes people want to punch you in the face? Your face
Girl you make me feel like a Galaxy S7 Cause I want to explode in your pants.
Girl in West Virginia asks her Daddy if she can borrow the truck... Well baby, you know what you have to do to borrow the truck. When she finishes, she wipes her mouth and says "God damn Daddy, your dick tastes like shit." "Oh that's right, I already promised the truck to your brother."
Betting on Trump Two good friends, Tom and Mike, sit down at a bar one night to discuss politics.

Tom is a known Democrat and states "Hilary is the best choice for this country, I'm sure of it. There's no doubt in my mind that she will win our country over and take presidency by a landslide. Trump is going to ruin our country, I can't even fathom living in a country run by him."


Mike, a very educated intellectual political science major, also a known democrat, almost spits out his drink laughing.

"Nonsense! Trump's honesty will surely resonate within every American's heart come election time, and will undoubtedly win! In fact, I'm willing to bet $5000 that Trump will be president by the end of the year!"


Thinking the friend is off his rockers, the first friend gladly accepts the bet.

A few months later, after heavy controversy and corruption at the polls, Trump came out victorious by a very small margin. 

Distraught and defeated, Tom goes to Mike's apartment the next day to deliver the money by hand. Surprisingly, the landlord answered, and Tom explained the situation to the landlord. The landlord responded:

"That's strange, I heard Mike sobbing from my room last night, when they had announced the winner. He then came over this morning to announce his leave and paid the remainder of his rent."

Suddenly, Tom's phone rings. It's Mike.

 "Hey Tom, bring the money to the airport. Thanks again for paying for me to leave the country!"
A drunk man get into the bus and sits next to a priest ... The priest then, looking at him says :

"My son, don't you know that this is taking you to hell ?"

The drunk man answered :

"Oh shit, just took the wrong bus again...."
I tried to use a watch as a belt But it's just a waist of time 
What is the difference between Jurassic Park and Microsoft? One is an over-rated high tech theme park based on prehistoric information and populated mostly by dinosaurs, the other is a Steven Spielberg movie.
Why didn't the strawberry and banana get married? They cantaloupe
A guy is walking along a wooden fence... near a home for the mentally challenged.

From the other side, excited voices are shouting "Seven! Seven! Seven! Seven!" over and over. He decides to see what's going on so he bends down and peeks through a small hole in the  fence.

Soon as he looks, he gets poked in the eye.  

Now he hears the voices on the other side saying "Eight! Eight! Eight! Eight!"
I may be a blowhard but at least I dry.
Hilary Clinton has pneumonia SO SHE IS DEFINITELY NOT A ROBOT. SHE DEFINITELY  DOES NOT NEED TO RECHARGE.
I got a shot today Wouldn't be the first time I've gotten involved in doctor penetration.
Why did the video of the eighth note get taken off of youtube? It got flagged.
A young man was in a relationship with a horse... He was said to be very unstable.
Researchers Claim To Have Recorded Dolphins Having A "Conversation" . . . . . and turns out, they're racist. 
A kid asks his dad, "what's the difference between 'realistically' and 'potentially'"? His dad responds, "realistically you've heard this joke before, potentially, you will hear it again".
I was paper-thin as a kid. 
So I got ripped.
3 guys walked into a bar... I was outside, i didn't see what happend...
Give a dog a bone and you've made a friend for the day, teach a dog to bone and you'll have friends for life.
I tried to teach a class on how hard it is to make a Fibonacci Sequence. But it spiraled WAY out of control!
A Scotsman is tending his flock of sheep... (long) when he decides to take a nap under a nearby tree.
After he falls asleep, a young woman walking on a nearby road decides to play a joke on him.
She lifts up his kilt, takes a ribbon from her hair, ties it around his manhood, and leaves with a giggle.
After awhile the Scotsman wakes up and walks over by the bushes to take a wee.
He lifts up his kilt and is amazed to see a bright blue ribbon tied around his manhood.
without skipping a beat he says "well I don't know where you've been laddie, but I can see you won first prize!"

Electric hot air balloons How?
A superposition walks into a bar . . . . . . or ***did*** it???
A DNA molecule walks into a bar "What will it be?" asks the bartender. 

"ATCGGCAGGCTTCAGTTGCA" says the DNA molecule.
Why did Joey fall of the swing? Because he doesn't have arms.
Knock knock.
Who's there?
Not Joey.
So I heard that you can now rent Belgian comics for events and suchlike... ... apparently their alright, not to showy. Does what it says on the Tintin.
Did you hear about the priest that got knighted? Congratulations to Sir Mon
A gorilla dies at the Zoo... Just before the zoo opens. It's the only gorilla that that the zoo can afford, and it was by a large margin, the zoo's most popular attraction, so the owner goes to the former gorilla keeper and offers him an extra $300 every day if he'll put on a gorilla suit, go in the gorilla exhibit, and pretend to be a gorilla until the zoo can replace the deceased gorilla.

After a bout a week, word catches on that the gorilla has been acting more and more interesting, and people are coming in from all over the state to see the new gorilla. The zoo is getting more and more money, and due to this the former gorilla keeper asks for a raise of $200 more dollars a day to keep up the act. The zoo owner agrees, so long as the patronage keeps up.

Come another month, the interest in the gorilla has started to wear off, and the former keeper gets word. He creates an elaborate stunt to get more patrons and keep up his raise, by climbing over the enclosures fences, and climbing on top of the lions den. After dangling above the den for a good half hour, the man gets tired and slips into the den, and starts shouting "Help me! Help me I don't want to die!", Quickly a lion pounces on him and whispers in his ear "Shut the fuck up before you get us both fired!".
10 to live Doctor: "I'm sorry but you suffer from a terminal illness and have only 10 to live."

Patient: "What do you mean, 10? 10 what? Months? Weeks?!"

Doctor: "Nine, eight, seven...."



Donald Trump That was the joke 
What do you call a gay drive-by? A fruit roll up.
You know that problem people have where they eat whatever is in front of them? That's why I cant be a gynecologist.
After many years of studying at a university, I’ve finally become a PhD… or After many years of studying at a university, I’ve finally become a PhD… or Pizza Hut Deliveryman as people call it.
Strange that the chimney tends to survive a house fire. as a cold reminder of where the fire should have been. -Jimeoin
A Saskatchewan Farmer Retires A 65 year old Saskatchewan farmer decides to retire and move to the Rocky Mountains after living his whole life on the prairies. A few months later a friend comes to visit. 

"What do you think of the mountains?" his friend asks.

"They are okay, but they sure obscure the view."
I unsubscribed from the official earthbending subreddit. Getting tired of all these Internet Toph Guys.
Does a bear crap in the woods? Does the Pope crap on the broken lives and dreams of 200 deaf boys?
how do you disappoint a reddit user... [removed]
What are those Lol
A guy walks into a bar.. I don't know what happens next. I was standing outside.
My friend, Andy has two tickets for the 2017 Super Bowl. They are box seats plus airfare and hotel accommodations.  He didn't realize when he bought them that the Super Bowl game is the same day as his wedding - - so he can't go.  If you are interested and want to go instead of him, it's at St. Michael's Church.  Her name is Donna and she will be the one in the white dress.
NYC subway is the only place... Where you can get on the Number 1 train and watch some guy take a Number 2. 
How can a redneck tell his twin sisters apart? By taste.
Three guys are hiking through the woods when they find a lamp One of them picks it up, rubs it, and out pops a Genie.

It booms "You have finally freed me after all these years, so I'll grant each one of you 3 wishes."

The first guy immediately blurts out "I want a billion dollars." POOF, he's holding a printout that shows his account balance is now in fact 1,000,000,003.50

The second man thinks for a bit, then says "I want to be the richest man alive." POOF, he's holding papers showing his net worth is now well over 100 billion.

The third guy thinks even longer about his wish, then says "I want my left arm to rotate clockwise for the rest of my life." POOF, his arm starts rotating.

The Genie tells them it's time for their second wish.

First guy says: "I want to be married to the most beautiful woman on earth." POOF, a stunning beauty wraps herself around his arm.

Second guy says "I want to be good-looking and charismatic, so I can have every girl I want." POOF, his looks change and the first guy's wife immediately starts flirting with him.

Third guy says "I want my right arm to rotate counter-clockwise until I die." POOF, now both his arms are rotating, in opposite directions.

The genie tells them to think very carefully about their third wish.

First guy does, and after a while says "I never want to become sick or injured, I want to stay healthy until I die." POOF, his complexion improves, his acne is gone and his knees don't bother him any more.

Second guy says "I never want to grow old. I want to stay 29 forever." POOF, he looks younger already.

Third guy smiles triumphantly and says "My last wish is for my head to nod back and forth." POOF, he's now nodding his head and still flailing his arms around.

The genie wishes them good luck, disappears, and the men soon go their separate ways.

Many years later they meet again and chat about how things have been going. First guy is ecstatic: "I've invested the money and multiplied it many times over, so me and my family will be among the richest of the rich pretty much forever. My wife is a freak in the sheets, and I've never gotten so much as a cold in all these years."

Second guy smiles and says "Well, I built charities worldwide with a fraction of my wealth, I'm still the richest guy alive and also revered for my good deeds. I haven't aged a day since we last met, and yes, your wife is pretty wild in bed."

Third guy walks in, flailing his arms around and nodding his head, and says:
"Guys, I think I fucked up."
The sun said they were powerful, so did the moon The sun replied, but I give you power
Moon said I am full o your power.
What do you call an upside down blonde? A brunette with bad breath.
Civil War Jokes you say? I General Lee don't find them funny
The Nervous Priest A new priest at his first mass was so nervous he could hardly 
speak. After mass, he asked the monsignor for suggestions to help him do better in the future. 

The monsignor replied, "When I am worried about getting 
nervous on the pulpit, I put a glass of vodka next to the water glass. If I start to get nervous, I take a sip."
 
So next Sunday he took the monsignor's advice. At the 
beginning of the sermon, he got nervous and took a drink. He proceeded to talk up a storm. 

Upon his return to his office after the mass, he found the following note on the door: 

1. Sip the vodka, don't gulp. 
2. There are 10 commandments, not 12. 
3. There are 12 disciples, not 10. 
4. Jesus was consecrated, not constipated. 
5. Jacob wagered his donkey, he did not bet his ass. 
6. We do not refer to Jesus Christ as the late J.C. 
7. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are not referred to as Daddy, Junior and the spook. 
8. David slew Goliath, he did not kick the s**t out of him. 
9. When David was hit by a rock and was knocked off his donkey, 
don't say he was stoned off his a**. 
10. We do not refer to the cross as the "Big T." 
11. When Jesus broke the bread at the last supper he said, "Take 
this and eat it for it is my body." He did not say "Eat me". 
12. The recommended grace before a meal is not: Rub-A-Dub-Dub thanks for the grub, Yeah God. 
13. Next Sunday there will be a taffy pulling contest at 
St.Peter's not a peter pulling contest at St. Taffy's.

Wanna hear a joke Donald Trump
I am a master of tearable puns But only on paper
TIL if you repost a joke in this subreddit you can get a lot of Karma. ELI5: What does a repost need to make it to front page?
Farting Farting in a lift is wrong on so many levels!
I surprised my wife by giving her a pearl necklace. I tell ya, she's such an ingrate. Instead of thanking me, all she did was complain.

"Uh that's so gross, do you know how hard that is to clean up?"

Women, amirite?
I went to my local city's zoo. They had just one animal. A dog! It was a shit zu.
Parrot with no legs (NSFW) My uncle told me this joke, when I was a kid:

A suspicious husband who's working all day wants to spy on his wife. He decides to buy a parrot. There are 3 parrots to choose from at the local pet shop. The first one has perfect eye-sight but can't speak. The second one can speak two languages fluently but is blind. The third one is the total package, but he has no legs...he's standing on his dick.

The husband buys the bird, shows it to his wife and puts it into the bedroom. After a long day at work, the husband is rushing into the bedroom to ask the parrot: "Anything happened while I was gone?" "Yeah, there was this guy..." "What?! What was he doing here?" "He was kissing your wife and slowly undressed her." "..." "Than he threw her on the bed, and kept kissing her." "I'm going to kill this guy! What happened then?" "She opened his pants..."

"Go on!" "I don't know what happened after that..." "WHAT?! Why?" "I got stiff."
Sam and Dean from Supernatural are just like engineers Every time they try to solve a problem, they create new ones
What is a Muslim's favorite type of meat? Shalami! haha!
How is a gynecologist like a pizza delivery boy? They both get close enough to smell it, but if they eat it, they'll be fired.
Let me tell you a joke about chocolate bars.... ....I'm sure you'll snicker.
A cowboy rode into town and stopped at a saloon for a drink. Unfortunately, the locals always had a habit of picking on strangers, which he was. When he finished his drink, he found his horse had been stolen.

He went back into the bar, handily flipped his gun into the air, caught it above his head without even looking and fired a shot into the ceiling.


“Which one of you sidewinders stole my horse?!”, he yelled with surprising forcefulness.


No one answered.
“Alright, I’m gonna have another beer, and if my horse ain’t back outside by the time I finish, I’m gonna do what I dun in Texas! And I don’t like to have to do what I dun in Texas!”


Some of the locals shifted restlessly. The man, true to his word, had another beer, walked outside, and his horse has been returned to the post.


He saddled up and started to ride out of town. The bartender wandered out of the bar and asked, “Say partner, before you go… what happened in Texas?”


The cowboy turned back and said, “I had to walk home.”
I asked my girlfriend to fly to Italy with me to get married and eat melon. She told me "I cantaloupe".
What was Nazi Germany's favorite sea animal? Adolfin.
What did the bread say after its massage? Ahh, I kneaded that.
We're hosting a charity event for the people who struggle to reach orgasm. If you can't come, do let me know.
Difference between realistic and potential A kid walks upto his dad. He asks him to explain the difference between the words realistically and potentially. 

His father responds by telling him to go ask his mother if she would sleep with their neighbour, Brett, for a million dollars. He then told him to also ask his sister whether she would sleep with their neighbour, Brett, for a million dollars. And he also told him to ask his brother whether he would sleep with Brett for a million dollars. 

The kid asks everyone. He comes back and tells his dad that they all said yes. 

His father responds that potentially, we're sitting on 3 million dollars. Realistically, we have two whores and a faggot in the family.
Terrorists now have a brand new state of the art weapon that can be hidden in plain sight The Galaxy Note 7
new iPhone 7 son: Daddy, buy me the new iPhone 7 

Dad: What is the magic word?

son: Natasha

Dad: who is Natasha

son: your lover

Dad: do you need also a case?
What does a bum call a dumpster. A Bed and Breakfast. 
Was is the epitome of machoness? When a guy about to have a blowjob can't get up and say: Does this happen to you often?
My friend told me that he likes his steak well-done We are no longer friends
What do bears in Mexico eat?  The same shit as all the other bears. What? Were you expecting a pun?
Two old guys, one 80 and one 87, were sitting on a park bench one morning. The 87-year-old had just finished his morning jog and wasn't 
even short of breath.

The 80-year-old was amazed at the guy's stamina and asked him what he did to have so much energy.

The 87-year-old said, "Well, I eat rye bread every day.
It keeps your energy level high and you'll have great stamina with the ladies."
So, on the way home the 80-year-old stopped at the bakery.
As he was looking around, the saleslady asked if he needed any help.

He said, "Do you have any rye bread?"

She said, "Yes, there's a whole shelf of it. 
Would you like some?"

He said, "I want five loaves."

She said, "My goodness, five loaves! By the time you get to the 3rd loaf, it'll be hard."

He replied, 
"I can't believe everybody knows about this shit but me."
Doctor Octopus robbed a bank today. He didn't have a gun, but he was well armed.
what did homer Simpson say when he was mad dough.....
What noise does a Russian Sheep make? It Blyats.
What can fly but can't be given? A fuck.
What did Stevie Wonder say when he tried marihuana? "This shit is not tobacco."
What do people drive in the fall? Autumn-mobiles.
Gabe Newell should be the World President He will prevent World War 3.
What's 7 inches and makes women submissive? A knife.
Put the punchline in the title How do you spoil a joke?
What do you call a promiscuous girl in special ed? A tater thot
A blonde is driving along the road one day and she passes an open field. As she is driving by she sees another blonde out in the middle of the field in a row boat rowing frantically even though she is not in any water and is not making any progress.

Furious at what she sees the blonde pulls over her car on the side of the road and gets out of the car.  After observing the blonde rowing frantically and getting nowhere, she can't contain her rage any longer.

"HEY!!" the blond screams at the other blonde in the rowboat. "IT'S STUPID BLONDES LIKE YOU THAT MAKE US SMART BLONDES LOOK BAD AND IF I COULD SWIM I WOULD COME OUT THERE AND KICK YOUR ASS!!"
Why was Rose sad about the new iPhone 7? There was no jack
My favorite word is … My favorite word is "world domination". It's two words now, but not when I'm done with if.
I had another job interview today. The interviewer said, “What would you say your greatest weakness is?” 

I said, “I think I’d have to say my listening skills are my greatest strength.”
A Tech Support Story This guy calls in to complain that he gets an "Access Denied" message every time he logs in.
It turned out he was typing his user name and password in capital letters.
Tech Support: "OK, let's try once more, but use lower case letters"
Customer: "But i only have capital letters on my keyboard"
How a phone recall works. Samsung: Send us your exploding phone.

Microsoft/Nokia: A software update will fix that.

Apple: You are using it wrong.
I just met a girl with 12 nipples... Sounds pretty freaky, *dozen tit.*
I was going to tell you a joke about sodium but... Na. 
I have a sexual attraction and fetish for car races I just love getting off to a good start
Why don't counterfeiters need a college degree? They already make a lot of money.
Wal-Mart supercenters are going to be getting dental clinics to go with their pharmacies and vision centers.... There will actually be two clinics in each store---one regular clinic and an express clinic for people with ten teeth or less.
Why was the 4 year old African kid crying? He was having a mid-life crisis.
The uniform tells all Three boys attended a private elementary school run by priests. These boys always made sure to come to school prepared and in complete uniform, which they loved because of their amazing blue blazers, slick blue tie, and sweet black pants.

During class, Father John would lecture and always use the chalkboard. This left the priest's hands covered in chalk and whenever a student needed assistance doing homework, he would leave a handprint on the blazer of the student after patting the student on the back for a job well done.

Every kid could tell who had the most help as some students had more prints left over than others. The three boys liked to do weekly checks on their wardrobe to see who was struggling in order to help out that student.

One day they all brought their uniforms over to the first boy's house. The first boy pulled out his blazer and there were two handprints on the back. The boys laughed at the first boy because he needed help.

The second boy pulled out his uniform and he had five handprints on his back. The other boys starting laughing even harder at the second boy for all the help he needed.

Finally the third boy pulled out his blazer and the other boys wet shocked in awe that no handprints were ever found. The third boy stood with his head held high so proud of his accomplishment. "Wow, im jealous," said the first boy, "and you even got new white pants too!"
change the girl If you can't change the girl , change the girl 
Why can't you hear a pterodactyl urinate? The "P" is silent
A priest, a pedophile and a rapist A priest, a pedophile, and a rapist walk into a bar. Then he sits down
My friends asked me what I liked about Switzerland Well the flags a big plus. 
If a kiss is first base, and making love is a home run, what do you call a threesome? Extra Innings!
Incest is alright as long as it stays in the family
Why does ACDC prefer Android to Apple? She's Got The Jack
Is sex work? If so, then I am unemployed.
My friends were always drunk in college The punchline?

Full, at every event.
Why would I donate £2 to save a kid's life? I'd rather spend that £2 on a condom to prevent a kid's life.
My girlfriend said I have crusty feet. I blame my socks.
Person 1: "Have you seen that new movie about the tractor?" Person 2: "No, but the trailer looks good."
We are not talking over a radio! This relationship is over!

Me: This relationship is what? Over
What do you call two gay Irishmen? Patrick Fitzmichael and Michael Fitzpatrick
He asked a genie to be able to create the best games ever but.. .. now everyone he fucks becomes homosexual, a gay-maker. 
Why couldn't Hillary Clinton keep up her US presidential campaign? She was let down by a weak Constitution.
"My dad died on 9/11, I'll never forget his last words.", says Ahmed "What did he say?", John asks.

"Allahu Akbar!"
If you're going to the sperm bank because you owe Paul money You're rubbing peter to pay Paul.
Difference Between Good Girls And Bad Girls Difference Between Good Girls And Bad Girls
Good Girls Open Few Buttons In Hot Atmosphere,
But Bad Girls Open All Buttons To Make The Atmosphere Hot.


What's al Qaeda's favorite football team? The New York Jets.
Buddies This guy brings his best golf buddy home, unannounced, for dinner at 6:30, after enjoying a day of golf.  His wife screams her head off while his friend sits open mouthed and listens to the tirade.
"My hair and makeup are not done, the house is a f****** mess, and the dishes aren't done. I’m completely exhausted! I didn’t get enough sleep last night. Can't you see I'm still in my f****** pajamas??  I can't be bothered with cooking tonight! Why the f*** did you bring him home without letting me know ahead of time, you stupid idiot?"
 
“Because he’s thinking of getting married..."
I've never been good when it comes to Greek mythology. It truly is my Achille's elbow.
A guy with a monkey walks into a bar... A guy with a monkey on his shoulder walks into a bar. No one really pays him any attention. He walks up to the bar and asks for a drink. The monkey gets off his shoulder and heads over to a pool table. The monkey picks up the cue ball and then eats it. 

"You're going to have to pay for another cue ball," the bartender says.

"Relax," the man says, "I will return with it in a few days."

3 days later, the man comes back with his monkey and hands the bartender the cue ball. He then sits down and orders a drink. The monkey gets off his shoulder. It grabs a peanut, sticks it up its butt, and then eats it.

"Why did he do that?" the bartender asks.

The man replies, "He likes to measure things now beforehand."
Control Dear Control A girl realized that she had grown hair between her legs. She got worried and asked her mom about that hair.

Her mom calmly said, “That part where the hair has grown is called Monkey, be proud that your monkey has grown hair.” …. the girl smiled.

At dinner, she told her sister, “My monkey has grown hair.”

Her sister smiled and said, “That’s nothing, mine is already eating bananas.”
Did you hear about the Cookie Monster went into the army? He got sent to Viet-nomnomnomnomnom
If Donald trump and Hilary Clinton both go down on a ship who survives? America that's a no brainer
I was talking to my friend earlier. I thought, "Why on earth are you called Earlier?" 
What is the most sensitive part of your body when masturbating? Your Ears.
Does it Serve You Right? That short-sighted man was losing his way.
Suddenly, he saw a crow perching on a rock in the distance and thought that was a person. He called it and asked the way several times but he didn't hear any answers at all. He came near and asked it again but it was afraid of him and flew off. The man said pleasantly:
- I asked you the way but you were too merciless to show it to me. That's why your hat has been blown off by the wind. Does it serve you right?
What do you call a bird that speaks Spanish? A Si-gull 
What did Crazy Eddie's widow say to the funeral director? These prices are insaaaane
A woman walks into a bar… She sits down and orders a drink. "Just give me anything," she says. A female bartender, new on the job, notices the woman applying a thin layer of lipstick with trembling hands. "Are you… okay?" 

"What this? This ain't anything new." She pauses. "It's the crime. This town seems overrun by it. Every day there is a new bad guy and who do they call to straighten things out?"

"The police?" asks the bartender innocently.

"Try again." The patron takes out her phone and places it on an adjacent bar stool. Then she kicks off one of her stilettos and begins pecking at her smartphone with her big toe.

The bewildered bartender whistles for her brother - owner and town local - to come check it out.

Suddenly, a gust of wind blows into the bar revealing the patrons silky red cape. "What the… Is that a cape you're wearing?" the bartender asks with wide eyes. But the patron seemed too involved in her phone and trembling lipstick application to answer. "Say, what's your name?" the bartender asks. 

"Cali."

Finally, the bartender's brother comes out from the kitchen. "Who is that?" she asks him pointing at Cali. He responds, "Who her? That's just Super Cali, Fragile Lipstick. Texting with her toe, sis."
With the iPhone 7 we have to charge the phone and the earphones, with the iphone 8 ... ... I think we'll also have to charge the charger.
I love hillary Clinton so much. It makes me weak at the knees.
I walked in on my son trying to suck his own penis. He jumped up, "Dad! It's not what it looks like!"

"Don't worry, son." I replied. "I've tried too."

He said, "Really?"

I said, "Yeah. But you woke up before I had the chance."
What happened to the guy who couldn't keep his pants up? He won the No-belt Prize! 

Thank you! I'll show myself out.
I got a papercut writing my suicide note. It's a start. 

-Steven Wright
Donald and Hillary go into a bakery .. Donald and Hillary go Into a
Bakery on the Campaign Trail 
 
As soon as they enter the
bakery, Hillary steals three pastries and puts them in her pocket. 
 
She says to Donald, "See how
clever I am?   
 
The owner didn't see anything
and I don't even need to
lie.”   
 
I will definitely win the
election.   
 
Donald says to Hillary,
"That's the typical dishonesty you have displayed throughout your entire life, trickery and deceit. 
 
I am going to show you an
honest way to get the same result." 
 
Donald goes to the owner of
the bakery and says, "Give me a pastry and   I will show you a magic trick."   
 
Intrigued, the owner accepts
and gives him a pastry.   
 
Trump swallows it and asks
for another one. 
 
The owner gives him another
one.   
 
Then Donald asks for a third
pastry and  eats that,
too.   
 
The owner is starting to 
wonder where the magic trick is and  asks, "What did you do with the 
pastries?  
 
Trump replies, "Look in 
Hillary's pocket"... 

I hate it when people make eye puns... It really makes me *lash* out sometimes
What do you call a one legged female pirate? ARRRRlene...
Why is six afraid of seven? Because it is a Note.
How do you get a fool to read something? Mark it as NSFW
What's Hillary's favorite pizza place? Little Seizures


Edit: credit to Joe Biggs @rambobiggs
A kid asks his dad what the difference between 'realistically' and 'potentially' is A kid walks upto his dad. He asks him to explain the difference between the words realistically and potentially. 

His father responds by telling him to go ask his mother if she would sleep with their neighbour, Brett, for a million dollars. He then told him to also ask his sister whether she would sleep with their neighbour, Brett, for a million dollars. And he also told him to ask his brother whether he would sleep with Brett for a million dollars. 

The kid asks everyone. He comes back and tells his dad that they all said yes. 

His father responds that potentially, we're sitting on 3 million dollars. Realistically, we have two whores and a faggot in the family.
A guy goes to a carnival... A young guy goes to a carnival. He is around 17, so he's a bit "frisky". So he goes looking around for a sword swallower. He finds the clowns.

"Nope not for me." He says. He then finds the magicians and says the same thing. When he finally finds the sword swallowers, he looks for a nice female one.

He says, "I got a sword for you to swallow," and winks. She then says,

"Me too"
What do you get if you combine your mom and a giraffe? A fat giraffe
Blonde Jokes I could have been a karma whore and posted these one by one but here is a very long list of good blonde jokes.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
A blonde enters a store that sells curtains. She tells the salesman, "I would like to buy a pair of pink curtains."
  
 The salesman assures her that they have a large selection of pink curtains. He shows her several patterns, but the blonde seems to have a hard time choosing.
  
 Finally she selects a lovely pink floral print. The salesman then asks what size curtains she needs.
  
 The blonde promptly replies, "Fifteen inches."
  
 "Fifteen inches?" asked the salesman. "That sounds very small - what room are they for?"
  
 The blonde tells him that they aren't for a room, but they are for her computer monitor.
  
 The surprised salesman replies, "But miss, computers do not need curtains!"
  
 The blond says, "Hellllooooooooo! I've got Windoooooows!"

--------

Jack, a handsome man, walked into a sports bar around 9:58 pm.  He sat down next to this blonde at the bar and stared up at the TV... The 10:00 news was on. The news crew was covering a story of a man on a ledge of a large building preparing to jump.  The blonde looked at Jack and said,  "Do you think he'll jump?" Jack says, "You know what, I bet he will."  The blonde replied, "Well, I bet he won't."  Jack placed $30 on the bar and said, "You're on!"  

Just as the blonde placed her money on the bar, the guy did a swan dive off of the building, falling to his death.  The blonde was very upset and handed her $30 to Jack, saying, "Fair's fair... Here's your money."  Jack replied, "I can't take your money, I saw this earlier on the 5 o'clock news and knew he would jump.  

"The blonde replies, "I did too;  but I didn't think he'd do it again."
 Jack took the money...

---------

A blonde lady motorist was about two hours from San Diego when she was flagged down by a man whose truck had broken down. 

The man walked up to the car and asked, "Are you going to San Diego?"

"Sure," answered the blonde, "do you need a lift?"

"Not for me. I'll be spending the next three hours fixing my truck. My problem is I've got two chimpanzees in the back which have to be taken to the San Diego Zoo. They're a bit stressed already so I don't want to keep them on the road all day. Could you possibly take them to the zoo for me? I'll give you $100 for your trouble." 

"I'd be happy to," said the blonde. So the two chimpanzees were ushered into the back seat of the blonde's car and carefully strapped into their seat belts. Off they went. 

Five hours later, the truck driver was driving through the heart of San Diego when suddenly he was horrified!! There was the blonde walking down the street and holding hands with the two chimps, much to the amusement of a big crowd. 

With a screech of brakes he pulled off the road and ran over to the blonde.

What in the world are you doing here?" he demanded. "I gave you $100 to take these chimpanzees to the zoo." 

"Yes, I know you did," said the blonde," but we had money left over -- so now we're going to Sea World."

---------

Two blondes living in Oklahoma were sitting on a bench talking, and one blonde says to the other, 'Which do you think is farther away... Florida or the moon?'

The other blonde turns and says 'Helloooooooo, can you see Florida ???

------

A blonde pushes her BMW into a gas station. She tells the mechanic it died. After he works on it for a few minutes, it is idling smoothly. She says, 'What's the story?'

He replies, 'Just crap in the carburetor'

She asks, 'How often do I have to do that?'

------

A police officer stops a blonde for speeding and asks her very nicely if he could see her license.

She replied in a huff, 'I wish you guys would get your act together. Just yesterday you take away my license and then today you expect me to show it to you!'

------

There's this blonde out for a walk. She comes to a river and sees another blonde on the opposite bank. 'Yoo-hoo!' she shouts, 'How can I get to the other side?'

The second blonde looks up the river then down the river and shouts back, 'You ARE on the other side.'

------

A gorgeous young redhead goes into the doctor's office and said that her body hurt wherever she touched it. 'Impossible!' says the doctor. 'Show me.'

The redhead took her finger, pushed on her left shoulder and screamed, then she pushed her elbow and screamed even more. She pushed her knee and screamed; likewise she pushed her ankle and screamed. Everywhere she touched made her scream.

The doctor said, 'You're not really a redhead, are you?

'Well, no' she said, 'I'm actually a blonde.'

'I thought so,' the doctor said. 'Your finger is broken.'

------

A highway patrolman pulled alongside a speeding car on the freeway. Glancing at the car, he was astounded to see that the blonde behind the wheel was knitting!

Realizing that she was oblivious to his flashing lights and siren, the trooper cranked down his window, turned on his bullhorn and yelled, 'PULL OVER!'

'NO!' the blonde yelled back, 'IT'S A SCARF!'

------

A Russian, an American, and a Blonde were talking one day.

The Russian said, 'We were the first in space!'

The American said, 'We were the first on the moon!'

The Blonde said, 'So what? We're going to be the first on the sun!'

The Russian and the American looked at each other and shook their heads. 'You can't land on the sun, you idiot! You'll burn up!' said the Russian.

To which the Blonde replied, 'We're not stupid, you know. We're going at night!'

------

A blonde was playing Trivial Pursuit one night. It was her turn. She rolled the dice and she landed on Science & Nature. Her question was, 'If you are in a vacuum and someone calls your name, can you hear it?'

She thought for a time and then asked, 'Is it on or off?'

------

A girl was visiting her blonde friend, who had acquired two new dogs, and asked her what their names were.

The blonde responded by saying that one was named Rolex and one was named Timex.

Her friend said, 'Whoever heard of someone naming dogs like that?'

'HELLLOOOOOOO......,' answered the blonde. 'They're watch dogs!'

I found my dad in the garden slumped over the lawnmower in tears... Mom says he's going through a rough patch...
A sad, depressed guy is walking along the beach... Suddenly he hears a booming voice from above, and it yells, "**DIG**!"

Confused, the man stops and he hears the voice again, this time louder. "**DIG**!"

So he immediately falls to his knees and starts digging in the sand. Suddenly he hits something solid. A buried chest. "**OPEN**!" Yells the booming voice. 

So the man opens the chest to find hundreds of thousands of dollars inside. "**CASINO**!" Booms the voice. 

So the man runs off the beach, flags down a cab and tells the driver to head to the nearest casino. After 20 minutes the cab arrives. "**ENTER**!" Booms the voice. 

The man enters the casino. "**ROULETTE**!"

So the man heads straight to the roulette table and awaits further instruction. "**RED 21**!"

The man then puts the entire contents of the chest on red 21. The croupier spins the wheel and the result is black 4. The booming voice yells "**FUCK**!"
Who invented a Blow Job? Mermaids. 
I used to be addicted to the Hokie Pokie but I've turned myself around.

and that's what it's all about. 
Apparently, 1/3 friends physically abuse others Its not me or lenny for sure. So I beat the shit out of james just in case.
What's a cat's favorite day of the week? Caturday.
Furiday is a close second.

EDIT: BRING THE DOWNVOTES
Someone called me racist for saying the 'n' word... I am **not** racist! There is a black guy in my family tree, he's still hanging there...
Whoever said white people can't jump Has never seen 9/11 footage
I got stung by a bee yesterday..... Charged me £8.00 for a jar of honey...
A blonde hears a guy telling blond jokes... She says "i'm blond, and that's very insulting." Guy says, "alright, I'll repeat it slowly."
If you're cold, just stand in a corner... They're usually 90 degrees.
Working at home sucks Paul, firefighter
I just realized, yesterday was 9/11... Well, I always forget.
War does not determine who is right... ...only who is left.
A dead duck A woman brought a very limp duck into a veterinary surgeon. As she laid her pet on the table, the vet pulled out his stethoscope and listened to the bird's chest. 

After a moment or two, the vet shook his head and sadly said, "I'm sorry, your duck, Cuddles, has passed away." 

The distressed woman wailed, "Are you sure?"
 "Yes, I am sure. Your duck is dead," replied the vet.. 

"How can you be so sure?" she protested. "I mean you haven't done any testing on him or anything. He might just be in a coma or something." 

The vet rolled his eyes, turned around and left the room. He returned a few minutes later with a black Labrador Retriever. As the duck's owner looked on in amazement, the dog stood on his hind legs, put his front paws on the examination table and sniffed the duck from top to bottom. He then looked up at the vet with sad eyes and shook his head. The vet patted the dog on the head and took it out Of the room. 

A few minutes later he returned with a cat. The cat jumped on the table and also delicately sniffed the bird from head to foot. The cat sat back on its haunches, shook its head, meowed softly and strolled out of the room. 

The vet looked at the woman and said, "I'm sorry, But as I said, this is most definitely, 100% certifiably, A dead duck." 

The vet turned to his computer terminal, hit a few keys and produced a bill, which he handed to the woman.. The duck's owner, still in shock, took the bill. "$150!" 

She cried, "$150 just to tell me my duck is dead!" 

The vet shrugged, "I'm sorry. If you had just taken my word for it, the bill would have been $20, but with the Lab Report and the Cat Scan, it's now $150." 

What did the math teacher tree say to the music teacher tree? Nice log rhythms 
I farted in my wallet now i have gas money.
What did the grape say when the elephant stepped on it? Not much. It just gave a little whine.
My date asked me if I smoked after sex. I told her "I dunno, I've never checked."
What's for dinner? A man feared his wife wasn't hearing as well as she used to and he thought she might need a hearing aid.
No quite sure how to approach her, he called the family doctor to discuss the problem. The doctor told him there is a simple informal test the husband could perform to give the doctor a better idea about her hearing loss. Here's what you do " said the doctor, "stand about 40 feet away from her, and in a normal conversational speaking tone see if she hears you. If not, go to 30 feet, then 20 feet, and so on until you get a response.
That evening, the wife is in the kitchen cooking dinner, and he was in the den. He says to himself " I'm about 40 feet away, let's see what happens". Then in a normal tone he asks "Honey, what's for dinner?" No response
So the husband moves to closer to the kitchen, about 30 feet from his wife and repeats, "Honey, what's for dinner?" Still no response. Next he moves into the dinning room where he is about 20 feet from his wife and asks " Honey, what's for dinner?" Again he gets no response so.
He walks up to the kitchen door, about 10 feet away. "Honey, what's for dinner?" Again there is no response. So he walks right up behind her. "Honey, what's for dinner?" "Honey, for the FIFTH time I've said, CHICKEN!"
I think my grandmother has been spying on me in my bedroom. She told me I have a lot of spunk!
A pickup poem RAMBUTANS ARE HAIRY


DURIANS ARE THORNY


LOOKING AT YOU


MAKES ME REALLY HORNY
Man goes into a store to buy a guard dog... The owner shows him 4 dogs. He tells him that the first dog costs 100 dollars and it will bark when it catches a criminal. The second dog costs 200 dollars and it will bark and hold the criminal down. The third one costs 400 dollars and it will bark, grab the criminal and put him in jail.

"What about the last one?", said the customer.

"The last one costs 800 dollars", said the owner.

"Huh? But why?", said the customer.

"Because the other dogs call him 'Sir'!" 

(again the joke loses some of its sense caz it was translated from arabic, other than that, sorry for slightly bad grammar :D)
I can't stand holocaust jokes, they hit too close to home. My grandfather died in a concentration camp. He fell off one of the watchtowers
Why don't snakes have legs? Because otherwise they'd be lizards.
What's the difference between being hungry and horny? Where you put the cucumber in
Way down upon the Mississippi... Two tugboat captains who had been friends for years, would always cry “Aye!” and blow their whistles whenever they passed each other. 

A new crewman asked his boat’s mate, “What do they do that for?”

The mate looked surprised and replied, “You mean that you’ve never heard of an aye for an aye and a toot for a toot?”
Is the world manichean or relativist ? I'd say it's a little bit of both.
What's the weather like in Iraq ? Sunni in the North Shiite in the South﻿.
I saw a tranny in a miniskirt the other day I thought, that shows a lot of balls
Music is like candy Just throw out the wrappers.
I heard the chief of police on the news saying "we will never forget 9 11" I should bloody hope so its your phone number
THERE IS A THIN LINE BETWEEN 911.. AND 9/11
What do you call a Jewish Ginger? Gingerbread.

Edit: Here comes the downvote brigade, haha!
A prisoner was half way through his ten to twelve stretch when he was beaten and fell into a comma , which helped him finish his sentence.
Money And Friends 
"Since he lost his money, half his friends don't know him any more"

"And the other half ?"

"They don't know yet that has lost it"
I tried to eat a clock once... But it was very time consuming
What did the reverend say before eating his salad? Lettuce Pray. 
Great Mystery 
Newsboy : "Great mystery! Fifty victims! Paper, mister ?"

Passerby : "Here boy, I'll take one" (After reading a moment) "Say, boy, there's nothing of the kind in this paper. Where is it ?"

Newsboy : "That's the mystery, sir. You're the fifty first victim".
how much does it take for two octopi to laugh? 16 tickles because not asking for insurance is insane in the US, sorry to go out on a limb...
What's better than winning gold in the Paralympics? Legs.
What's the difference between a grenade and the Samsung Note 7? You gotta pull the pins on grenades, but push the charging pins in a Note 7.
What's the difference between tuna, glue and a piano? You can tuna piano but you can't piano tuna!
A new study has shown that women who get more sleep have better sex. Unfortunately the study was conducted by Bill Cosby.
What's the boob of a nun called? Sanctity.
What's the difference between sandpaper and a baby? The sandpaper doesn't scream when I rub it's face on wood.
Am I a schizophrenic... ...or is it just me?
Dirty Old Man An elderly man in Louisiana owned a large farm for several years.  

He had a large pond in the back. It was properly shaped for swimming, so he fixed it up nice with picnic tables, horseshoe  courts, and some apple and peach trees. 

One evening the old farmer decided to go down to the pond, to look it over, as he hadn't been there for a while. 

Before he went, he grabbed a five-gallon bucket to bring back some fruit. 

As he neared the pond, he heard voices shouting and laughing with glee. As he got closer, he saw it was a bunch of young women skinny-dipping in his pond.  

He made the women aware of his presence and they all went to the deep end.

One of the women shouted to him, "We're not coming out until you leave!"  

The old man replied, "I didn't come down here to watch you ladies swim naked or make you get out of the pond naked."

Holding the bucket up, he said... "I'm here to feed the alligator!"

The smartest dog One day, two women were arguing about whose dog is smarter.

The first woman says, "My dog's so smart, every morning he waits for the paper-boy to come around and then he takes the newspaper and brings it to me."

The second woman replies, "I know.."

The first woman, surprisingly ask, "How do YOU know?"

The second woman says, "My dog told me."
Dark comedy is like food Not everyone gets it. 
Why couldn't the laptop go to sleep? Because it has two shifts.
9/11 jokes are hurtful to me. My dad died that day The best damn pilot in Saudi Arabia. Sniff. 
Wrong email address. A couple going on vacation but his wife was on a business trip so he went to the destination first and his wife would meet him the next day.

When he reached his hotel, he decided to send his wife a quick email.

Unfortunately, when typing her address, he mistyped a letter and his note was directed instead to an elderly preacher’s wife whose husband had passed away only the day before.

When the grieving widow checked her email, she took one look at the monitor, let out a piercing scream, and fell to the floor in a dead faint.

At the sound, her family rushed into the room and saw this note on the screen:

Dearest Wife,
*Just got checked in. Everything prepared for your arrival tomorrow.*

*P.S. Sure is hot down here.*

An old bosnian joke my dad told me. Theres a man named haso and its his first day on the job as a taxi driver and he just picked up a tourist
as they're driving around the tourist sees a building that he thinks is absolutely beautiful
the tourist gently reaches forward and taps haso on the shoulder and haso spins the car out of control, crosses 3 lanes of traffic, hits a car, and crashes into a light pole
the tourist then says: "i'm so sorry! i didn't think gently tapping you on the shoulder would cause you to lose control like that! You probably get robbed pretty often in your city."
Haso says: "Oh, go fuck yourself ! Today is my first day of work as a taxi driver. The last 20 years I drove a hearse."
My ex-girlfriends always come back to me. To fix problems that their boyfriends can't fix. 


Why didn't Rose get an iPhone 7? She never let go, Jack.
IMPROVE YOUR MEMORY Two elderly couples were enjoying friendly conversation when one of the men asked the other: “Fred, how was the memory clinic you went to last month?” 
“Outstanding”, Fred replied. “They taught us all the latest psychological techniques – visualization, association – it has made a big difference for me”. 
“That’s great! What about the name of the clinic?” 
Fred went blank. He thought and thought but couldn’t remember. Then a smile broke across his face and he asked, “What do you call that flower with the long stem and thorns?” 
“You mean a rose?” 
“Yes, that’s it!” 
Then he turned to his wife and asked: “Rose, what was the name of that clinic?
Why did the porn star end up in the E.R.? One too many blows to the head.

My only original joke.  I'll see myself out.
My dad was always drunk when I was a kid The punchline?

It was my mom, then my sister, then me
I know why iPhone decided to nix the headphone jack. They don't know shit
I like my coffee like I like my women. Strong and Bitter
Why would anyone ever want to fly Virgin Airlines? The last thing you want to do is get on a plane that doesn't go all the way.
Why did the farmer's bucket keep singing songs? Because it was haulin' oats.
The police didn't believe me when I told them I found a flying carpet... They called the whole thing fabricated.
The teacher asks little Johnny to tell the class what he thinks sex is Little Johnny was getting to that age, so in class the teacher wanted to know how much each student knew about sex. For that, she asked everyone to explain sex as they understood it. 

First, little Mary explained it with the classic Birds and the Bees speech. "Good job, Mary", said the teacher. 

Not to be outdone, little Johnny said he also knew a story to explain sex. "Go ahead", said the teacher, a little wary.

"A long time ago, the Lone Ranger was chasing a band of robbers that had terrified a couple of towns for months. They were such a big problem that the towns banded together and offered a reward of pure gold to whoever could catch them. The Lone Ranger heard about this, and after a long chase and a hard-fought battle, he managed to capture the band. The townspeople gave him the gold in thanks.

Thinking to treat himself a little, the Lone Ranger decided to give the gold to a blacksmith so he could melt it and make him spurs and a ranger badge. But the blacksmith was a bad guy, so he made the spurs and badge out of copper, painted them, and kept the gold for himself. 

When the Lone Ranger came to pick them up, he didn't check them much so he happily rode off with the copper spurs." 

"And that, Miss, is sex".

Thoroughly confused by now, the teacher asked him: "Little Johnny, how is that sex?" 

"Well, the Lone Ranger really got fucked didn't he?" 
What do you call a prude's bra? Fort knockers!
What did the grocery clerk say when he bumped his head when he was in the freezer? Nothing, he was knocked out *cold*.
A B C D E F G H I J K M N Ñ O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Notice anything? 
No? Cause you took the L

What has it come to for me to use stale memes, kill me now
Why do Americans suck at Dota 2? Because they are bad at defending tower!
The revolution will not be televised. It will be streaming on netflix this summer
did you hear about what happened to Nike online shop It shut down by a d-dos
Why was Heisenberg's wife unhappy? Whenever he had the energy, he didn't have the time.
Did you hear Kim Jong Un banned sarcasm? Woops, thought this was r/News
A frog walks into a bank... ...and approaches the teller. He can see from her nameplate that her name is Patricia Whack.

"Miss Whack, I'd like to get a $30000 loan to take a holiday."

Patty looks at the frog in disbelief and asks his name. The frog says his name is Kermit Jagger, his dad is Mick Jagger, and that it's OK, he knows the bank manager. Patty explains that he will need to secure the loan with some collateral.

The frog says, "Sure. I have this," and produces a tiny porcelain elephant, about half an inch tall - bright pink and perfectly formed.

Very confused, Patty explains that she'll have to consult with the bank manager and disappears into a back office. She finds the manager and says, "There's a frog called Kermit Jagger out there who claims to know you and wants to borrow $30000, and he wants to use this as collateral."

She holds up the tiny pink elephant.

"I mean, what in the world is this?"

The bank manager looks back at her and says, "It's a knick-knack, Patty Whack, give the frog a loan. His old man's a Rolling Stone."
Massive fall on Wall St today... Nope, wait, just Hillary fainting.
How do I invest in the Umbrella Corporation? Because either Project Hillary or Project Donald will become a success.
If you ever get lost in the car, turn the AC down. Its easy to get around with a low-cool.
Man, I really hate all these low level Pokemon... They're always breaking my balls.
A pregnant woman goes into a coma A pregnant woman goes into a coma moments after she gives birth to twins, one boy and one girl. 
When she finally wakes up several days later, she cries out frantically to see her children. 
The doctors come to her, and the first thing she asks is "How are my children?" 
"Fine" says the doctor, "your brother named them". 
She thinks to herself, "Oh no!" "My brother's an idiot" and she asks the doctor "What did he name them?" 
The doctor says "He named the girl Denise" 
And she thinks, “Well, maybe I misjudged my brother... Denise isn't such a bad name"
What did he name the boy?" 
Replies the doctor "De nephew."

What do you call the boyfriend of a beheaded prositute? The headless whore's man
Forget it :P The thrill is gone from my marriage," Bill told his friend Doug.
"Why not add some intrigue to your life and have an affair?" Doug suggested.
"But what if my wife finds out?"
"Heck, this is a new age we live in, Bill. Go ahead and tell her about it!"
So Bill went home and said, "Dear, I think an affair will bring us closer together." "Forget it," said his wife. "I've tried that - it never worked."
I went to an 'Army Style training day'... I don't feel any fitter but my boots and bed look immaculate.
How many Vietnam veterans does it take to change a light bulb? You weren't there, man!
I heard... ...terrorists are shouting "allahu akbar!" just out of habit while plugging their Samsung phones. 
Knock Knock Who's there?
9/11
9/11 who?
9/11, I thought you said you'd never forget?
A Family Walks Into A Hotel... The Father walks up to the front desk and says "I hope the porn is disabled"  
The man at the desk replies "no, it's just regular porn you sick cunt"
Why did Patrick Stewart shave his head? So he could badly go where no man has gone before. 
I have a serious problem where I keep letting go of things when I hold them It's really getting out of hand.
My ex talked me into marriage I mean, she was my girlfriend before she became my wife
I've been stung Screamed the woman as she ran into the pro shop. 

"Where were you stung?" asked the concerned pro. 

"Between the first and the second hole" gasped the woman breathlessly. 

"Well" said the pro "then your stance may be a little too wide."
Why did the pirate captain suddenly die? He had an an*yarr*ysm.
Did you hear about the arm that tells jokes? They're actually quite humerus
3 guys are on a boat and they have 4 cigarettes but no lighters or matches or anything to light it with.What do they do? They throw one cigarette over board and the whole boat becomes a cigarette lighter.
I think my bank is trying to get me to become a gymnast. They keep sending me letters about my outstanding balance.
Why did you hit your little sister? Dad: Shame on you, Peter. Why did you hit your little sister? Peter: Well, Daddy, we were playing Adam and Eve with the apple and all. Well, instead of tempting me with that apple, she ate the thing herself!
Anniversary "Knock* Knock*"

:Who's there?

"9/11"

:9/11 who?

"You said you'd never forget!"
A knight goes to a blacksmith shop to get his armor repaired after a battle.

The blacksmith asks "What dy'a need, sir?"

"I have a nasty chink in my armor."

The blacksmith says "Well, ye' better get him out."
" Could the cereal your children eat every morning be killing them? Tonite at 11 on abcnews56 we will tell you" " After several  studies ,  no.  "
Why is it illegal to commit suicide? You aren't allowed to damage the government's property.
What is crucial to any joke about ISIS? The execution
Did you ever blow bubbles as a kid? Well, he's back in town and wants your number 
Why was the army recruiter in the nursery? To find more people for the infantry!

I'm sorry.
Why was the cookie monster arrested for computer hacking??? He was in possession of all the "COOKIES"
A blonde and a redhead watch the news...  A blonde woman and a redhead woman went to lunch. They had
 to wait for their table so they sat in the bar and had a drink. The 
 TV was on and they noticed the news was showing a man on a 
 rooftop threatening to jump. The redhead told the blonde "I 
 bet you 50 bucks he jumps." The blonde replied "You're on."
 Sure enough the man jumped, so the blonde starts to dig out her 
 money.

 The redhead felt kind of bad so she said "That's okay, I 
 cheated. I saw this on the 10 o'clock news last night." The 
 blonde turned to her and said "Well so did I, but I didn't think
 he would jump twice in a row!"
Dude I'm Colin Kapernick and I'm black. Dude you're not even brown. You look like Matthew Perry. 

-Harold and Kumar 
What did the tiger say to the leopard at the poker game? You better not be a cheetah
My brave uncle died on September 11, 2001 He was the best pilot in all of Saudi Arabia
Dad cooks venison and doesn't tell the kids what it is He gives them one hint:

"It's what your mother calls me"

The boy yells:

"It's a FUCKING DICK! Don't eat it!"
What is Jim Morrison's favorite time? Five to one.
How many ants does it take to fill an apartment? Tenants.
They ran out of bread at the Indian restaurant, but it turned out nobody cared. It was a naan issue.
What do you call a bull masturbating? Beef stroganoff 
The Online Biology Class I almost got expelled in an Online Biology crash course earlier. They asked me what the major constituent of cells are.

Turns out, "black people" is NOT a good answer.
when fruit talks Broccoli: Hey, I look like a tree.

Mushroom: Wow, I look just like an umbrella.

Walnut: I look exactly like a brain.

Banana: Man, can we change the topic please?

Hillary Clinton is sick according to doctors... I pneu it all along. 
I have somewhere around 300 karma I intend to drop it to 0 by having human-like opinions on the wrong subreddits
How does Tony Abbott connect to FaceTime He looks at a clock
My vaccume cleaner sucks because it doesn't suck... Unlike my other vaccume cleaner, which doesn't suck because it sucks.

(co-writing credit to smarties pants u/lord_of_the_realm)
A blind man walks into a bar and a table and a chair
What did Clinton tell the FBI? "I did not have classified relations with that server!"
I know where you live In a house
Finders, Keepers I saw this cool mine selling shop in Iraq.
The real reason Hillary Clinton stumbled A tiny plane flew into her.
Hillary Clinton collapsed at the 9/11 memorial today Showing that she truly did not forget.
There was a massive fight in the chip shop yesterday! A fish got battered.
Why did Patrick's girlfriend have to go to the doctor? She had a weast infection.
And they say jet fuel can't melt steel beams... When Hillary will collapse from too much hot sauce
Yerr a unit of power Harry! Im a watt?
I just got a Sleep Number mattress, and it turns out my sleep number is 911. Because a night in my bed, you'll never forget.
I met this lovely girl who's an amputee; lost her arms...She's a joy to be around, but... I just can't ask for her hand in marriage
What was the last pizza order at the Twin Towers? Two large plains. 
Jehovah's Witnesses are like testicles They come in pairs, one is always bigger than the other, they keep knocking on the door but never get in, and if they do, shits about to get freaky.
One time in medieval England ... One time in medieval England, there was a Lord who opposed hunting. One day, he issued a verdict that forbade hunting on his land. The peasants were angry, but the economy soon recovered. 

But within a few years, wild animals were overpopulating and began traveling into the fields and eating the crops. Peasants once more began to protest, but the Lord ignored them. 

Soon, the peasants could not grow food because the animal population was eating everything they planted. A large group stormed the castle, demanding the Lord end the ban, but he refused, and they killed him. 

This marked the only time in history that a reign was called because of the game.
I think it's pretty cool how the Chinese made a language... ...entirely out of tattoos.
I wanted to tell a joke about mazes. But the mods took it down because it was too corny...
Why was the fish swimming alone? Because he left the school. 
Cows really don't like those big, round bales of hay. They can't get a square meal.
What do you call LeVar Burton that survived months of being lost in the wilderness? Geordi La Forage
Why don't atheists use exponents? Because they don't believe in higher powers.
Did you guys hear the joke about the stunt man's flame? It was retarded
How do Muslims laugh? Muahahahamed


Note: I don't have any prejudices against Islamic people.
A flat earth conspiracist was boasting about how many people believe that the Earth is flat... He said, “We have supporters all around the globe!!!” 

Beef farmers in Washington are fighting to protect their cattle, whose water supply has been tainted with THC from the marijiana industry The steaks have never been higher 
Why is the US terrible at league of legends? Because they can't protect their towers.
Seattle Seahawks labeled Bud Light cans have the lowest sales compared to any other team. Most of their fans aren't old enough to buy beer yet.
Everyone needs to chill the hell out about Roe V. Wade. Honestly, they're both valid ways to get across water. 
What's the most original subreddit ever? /r/Jokes
Why is Jay Cutler gay? Because of all the sacks he takes.
A alcoholic man named Edward L. Trickle was at an AA meeting. They ask him to stand up and introduce himself.

"Hello, I'm Edward Lek, and I am an alcoholic."

After a few minutes of chat with the group, he removes a bottle of gin with a red N on it from his bag. They all gasp and ask what he's doing with it.

He pours it down his ear while the whole group watches in awe. "This is my way of drinking." He says.

After a few more minutes, the whole room's lightbulbs go dark. Edward gets up and fiddles with the circut breaker. The AA leader pulls him away and asks what he's doing.

"I can fix this, I am an E. Lek Trickle N Gin Ear."
Why did so many people fail to escape the Titanic? They were told "water under the bridge".
You're saying that the two people I don't want for president, one is in poor health? I'm voting for the dying one.
My boss asked me which Game of Thrones house he'd best be placed in... I told him House Lannister because it only takes one hand to go fuck yourself.
Chuck Norris has his legs blown apart after tripping on a landmine... He walked it off.
There's a new movie coming out about people who take a long time to orgasm... It hasn't released yet.
What did the north tower say to the south tower? Sorry, gotta go catch a flight. 
You can't run through a campground... ...you can only ran, because it's passed tents.
I ordered the latest, most advanced computer a month ago. It hasn't arrived yet.
Anal sex and cabbage have a lot in common. If you're forced to have it as a kid, you probably won't enjoy it as an adult. 
Give a girl a plane ticket... ... and she'll fly for a day.

Push a girl from a plane, and she'll get to fly for the rest of her life. 
Yo, Hillary, I'm really happy for you, and I'ma let you finish... ...but the World Trade Centre had one of the best collapses of all time! One of the best collapses of all time!
child to parent: "why dont you mentor me?" parent: "why dont you deserve a mentor?"
An iPhone 7 walks into a bar ... I'll have a Jack please!
What did the hacker do when the police came for him? He ransomware.
What's the difference between Hillary Clinton and Jimmy Carter? Carter will likely still be around for next year's inaguration. 
My nine year old's yo momma joke Yo momma so fat her patronus is a cake
In a collision, if one car is going twice as fast and the other weighs twice as much, who wins? The mortician 
I was involved in quite a violent mugging the other day 
On the plus side I did make a few quid
My girlfriend always giggles during sex. 
No matter what she's reading.
Chatting on a patio about Costa Rican beaches!! OMG The beaches in Costa Rica are Soooo beautiful It's hard to describe. Just thinking about it is starting to make me cry, or maybe it's just your cigarette smoke.


Mary's Grandpa died Mary's grandpa died of a heart attack and at his funeral she asks her grandma how that could happen. So grandma explains: "Mary, you are old enough now so I can tell you. Every sunday granpa and I would have sex. We always waited for the bell ringing of the church nearby. So when it started, your grandpa would lay on me and start. The bells would go ding, dong, ding, dong and grandpa would make love to me in the same tempo. In on the ding, out on the dong. So that's what we did last sunday and it would have been nice as always but then this stupid icecream truck drove down our street..."
The baby wasn't very good at transitioning out of breastfeeding I guess you could say he sucked at tit
Every time I have a big bowel movement I say thank you to my digestive system. For putting up with my shit.
Why did the kid only water half the lawn? Because there was a 50% chance of rain
As someone who grew up with the internet, I occasionally forget that things aren't always online. At least everything else is though.
For the first year of my time at college, I never had sex, all because of a stupid abstinence pledge I took for a bible study class... ...the other three years, I was just unlucky.
Honey, I have good news and bad news. The bad news is that the penguin pooped in the bathtub. Wife: "But we don't *have* a penguin!"
Me: "And now for the good news...!"
What does a jewish prostitute gotta do when she gets to someone's house? She gaza strip!
You might want to listen to that long Marvin Gaye song while stuck in that bad traffic today. It's a Slow Jam.
[Long] So there are two friends, Jack and Jill They were born in a countryside and were best friends in their childhood. They used to go up the hill and get water every day to their house. One day Jack found out that he was a son of a noble landlord and inherited a fortune. He left the village and Jill for his estate. Jill felt sad and stopped going up the hill for water and instead chose to go to a lake nearby. Jack growing in the rich family turns into a douche and pretentious. One day he wanted to show his friend Jill that he was living well off without him. So he goes to Village invites Jill to come over to the city to visit him. So he shows Jill everything and taunts him how Jill cannot afford them. Later he goes to drop Jill in his Village. Jill then suggests they both should go to the well, just like their childhood. Jack agrees to that. They go to the well spend some time. After they start their journey back the well starts to speak. It says it was a wishing well all along and says it used to be happy every time they both used to come here and play. It says that wishing wells have a limit of wishes to give before they turn into a normal well. It offers the friends the last wish it has. Jack being a douche says to Jill "I may not come to this bloody village again. I'll take the wish and will ask an iPhone for you for contacting me as it will take you a lifetime to buy one for yourself". Jill gets hurt and as soon as Jack starts wishing Jill at the same time wishes "I hope Jack disappears" with tears in his eyes. Jill ends up with an iPhone7
What did the squirtle say to the charizard? "Squirtle!"
A horse walks into a bar and says, “On a right-angled triangle with sides X, Y and Z, if X and Z are perpendicular, which side is opposite the right angle?” The bartender says, “Y, the long face.”
You know what would have made the Note 7 recall less disruptive? Removable Batteries
My Uncle died It's this time of the year again. I lost my uncle on 9/11. But at least he died during something he really enjoyed - flying airplanes.
When asked about Hillary's fall, Bill said not to worry "...she's never gone down on me like that."
What's the difference between Anton Scalia and Hillary Clinton? No one knew Scalia's death was imminent. 

(It's a reference to the HRC *health* status controversy-- not a threat, friends at Secret Service. Don't tase me bros!)
A girl with no arms or legs was on a beach... ...As a man walked pass her she started crying. The man asked, "Whats the matter, dear?" The girl replied with "I've never been hugged before." So the man hugs her and the girl starts crying again. The man asks "Whats wrong now?" The girl replies with "I've never been kissed before." So the man kisses her and the girl starts crying yet again. So the man asks, "Whats the matter now?" The girl replies with, "I've never been fucked before." So the man picks her up and throws her into the ocean and says "You're fucked now."﻿
I was at a cowboy fancy dress party and lost that wheel thing they have on their shoes... It was okay, someone had a spur. 
Turns out I have colon cancer. I'm getting part of it removed tomorrow. All I'll have left is a ;
Slow and steady wins the race But what if it's a running race
When you realize the Cincinnati Bengals have to win... for Harambe.
We got one good thing out of the removal of the headphone jack in the iPhone 7. Finally an end to selfie sticks!
A panda walks into a bar.  He asks the bartender how he can get a little action forthe night. The bartender motions to a young woman. She talks to the panda, and they go back to her place. After having sex,the panda abruptly leaves. The next night, the woman goes to the panda's house."You owe me money," she says. "For what?" The woman rolls her eyes and explains, "I'm a prostitute." The panda pulls out a dictionary and looks it up:"Prostitute: Has sex for money." The panda says, "I don't have to pay you. I'm apanda. Look it up." She is about to protest when the panda hands her the dictionary. The woman looks up "panda" in the dictionary, and it reads,"Panda: Eats bush and leaves.
Which american city would never forget 911? Detroit because if you forget it...you're dead.
What is Alqaeda´s favourite fetish? Blowing Twins.

(I actually made this up)
I have two kids, five and seven Silly names I know.
What does mexican ISIS do when they run out of bombs? They grab a fat guy and say: "AL AGUA JUAN!"
Is sex work? A U.S. Marine Colonel was about to start the morning briefing to his staff. While waiting for the coffee machine to finish its brewing, the colonel decided to pose a question to all assembled.
He explained that his wife had been a bit frisky the night before and he failed to get his usual amount of sound sleep. He posed the question of just how much of sex was "work" and how much of it was "pleasure?" A Major chimed in with 25-75% in favor of work . A Captain said it was 50-50%. A lieutenant responded with 25-75% in favor of pleasure , depending upon his state of inebriation at the time.
There being no consensus, the colonel turned to the PFC (Private First Class) who was in charge of making the coffee. What was HIS opinion?
Without any hesitation, the young PFC responded, "Sir, it has to be 100% pleasure."
The colonel was surprised and, as you might guess, asked why.
"Well, sir, if there was any work involved, the officers would have me doing it for them."
How many politicians does it take to screw in a lightbulb? You hold the lightbulb and every politician screws you! 
The zookeeper said he'd tell me where the bathroom is located if I can say the alphabet. "A B C E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z"

He asks: "where's the D?"

"It's out for Harambe"
My friend fell into the gelatto machine. Ice creamed in terror.
What kind of bus does a bee take to school? A school buzz
A Man goes to the Doctor Doctor: "I'm sorry but you suffer from a terminal illness and have only 10 to live."

Man: "What do you mean, 10? 10 what? Months? Weeks?!"

Doctor: "Nine."


a lot of people seem to dislike hot air balloons I don't see what all the hot air is about!
Did you hear about the guy who haggled with a prostitute for his pet deer? He wanted to get the most bang for his buck.
What happened to helium when the chemist made him laugh? He He He 
Want to hear a joke about helium? He he he.
Is it okay to post Islam jokes? Coz they really blow me away
I had to divorce my wife when I went blind. I just couldn't see myself with her anymore.
the only dates i get Are the system software updates to my xbox. Play station. PC. Phone...
What Saudi funded event ended in a massive collapse on 9/11? Hillary Clinton's campaign. 
How did 1940's German Men pick up Jewish Girls With a broom and a dustpan
What do Hillary Clinton and the World Trade Center have in common? Both collapsed on 9/11 after becoming overheated. 
To make a boob joke all you need to do is use words that end in 'it' Isn'tit?
Why did the baby cross the road? It didn't hit the car's windshield.
They say a BJ is better than a yank . But I'm not a big baseball fan, so I wouldn't know 
What happens to a desert-dwellers main transportation when it has been parked in one spot for too long? It gets Camel-Towed.
So a console gamer walks into a bar... Then it renders
After witnessing the second coming of Jesus. My life has changed. I have decided not to watch Mexican Porn again.
Why are the twin towers and genders so similar? Because there used to be 2 of them, but it's offensive to joke about that now.
What do you call a 53 year old who has sex with a 9 year old? 1.6 billion people call him Muhammad.
Clinton didn't faint due to heat exhaustion... ... she was just doing her steel beam impression.
Today is the anniversary.. Today is the 16th anniversary of the world's largest game of Jenga.
"Is there anybody here named Jeff?" Jeff: "Yes"
Geoff: "Yeos"
Height of misunderstanding.. Wife not talking to husband and thinking she is punishing him.
Guy asking his friend: "I'm looking for a second hand dishwasher, any address ?" friend: "meetic ?"
What was the first thing Adam said to Eve? Stand back! I don't know how big it's going to get!
Whenever someone makes a premature blanket conclusion based on a single piece of information... I automatically assume they're a complete idiot.
A woman is talking to her sexologist. She complains that her husband is just not passionate anymore. The sexologist gives her a viagara and tells her to slip into her husband's glass of wine at dinner time and to come back to tell her how it went. Two weeks later the woman comes back looking a little frustrated. The sexologist asks her: you don't look so pleased. Was your husband not horny enough? The woman says: oh yes he was. Right in the middle of the meal he put down his pants, violently cleared the table and fucked me so hard I'm still sore. The sexologist asks her: so what's the problem? The woman says: well, we were kicked out and told never to go back to that restaurant again. 
A story about a business trip (that actually happened) Boss was driving with one of his employees to Germany. 

The employee was from a smaller country, so he was really amazed by the German cities; they were so much bigger than the ones he visited in his country. 

Later on, as they were driving down the high way, the employee was looking at the scenery and, from time to time, he noticed some road signs that had the word Ausfahrt(exit in German) written on them. 

The employee was clearly impressed by what he's seen in Germany, and then, all exited, he turned to his boss and said: 

"Germany sure has big cities, but this Ausfahrt city is really enormous!"

.
.
The boss had to stop the car because he was laughing so much.
I saw the chief of a New York City police on the news I saw the chief of New York City police on the news, he said "We will never forget 9/11" 

I said "Well I sure fuckin' hope not it's your phone number"
What do the twin towers and genders have in common? There used to be 2 and now its offensive to talk about.
Today I Learned... Steve Biscotti bought a TIE fighter at 7-11. 
What do you call a tall gay man? Fruit by the foot.
What's something a whore turns on the street corner for money? AN ILLUSION, IT'S an ILLUSION
I'm changing Blair Walsh's kick accuracy to -1 Because he missed the 0 wide left.
Knock knock? Who's there?


9/11.
>

9/11 who? 


You said you'd never forget! 
15 years on and not much has changed since 9/11... ...Saudi funded collapses are STILL happening in NYC.


EDIT: Don't worry, Hillary is fine.  
When I was ten, my family moved to Downers Grove, Illinois.  When I was twelve, I found them.
What's AlQaeda's favorite football team? The New York Jets
I don't know about you but where I am the Bees are acting like Starks... Freaking out that winter is coming and dying left and right.
Wise man say... Man who passes gas in church sits in own pew.
I got mugged yesterday... The mugger said, “Give me your money or you’re science.”

I said, “Don’t you mean history?”

He said, “Don’t try and change the subject.”

Why Was Jill upest about the new iphone? because there was no jack.
I don't know why my friends tell me that my jokes are bad... *That's what she said!!!*
I often confuse Americans and Canadians. By using long words.

Gary Delany at the Edinburgh Fringe.
Link to other top jokes from there in /r/firstcircle
CGPA available for adoption.. … can’t raise it myself
How to fall down the stairs: Step 1
Step 2
Step 4
Step 7
Step 11
The candidates are tied in polls... ... And it's a shame. It would be so much better if they were tied to poles. 
I used to be really into nostalgia... ...man they were the good old times.
I was paper-thin as a kid. 
So I got ripped.
Here's a joke you've never heard before Jokes on you, there are no original jokes on r/jokes
Someone complimented me on my driving today They left a little note on the windscreen, it said 'Parking Fine.' So that was nice.
TIL A ball of glass will bounce higher than a ball of rubber. A ball of solid steel will bounce higher than one made entirely of glass. Oops, unoriginal post.
Why can’t atheists solve exponential problems? Because they don’t believe in higher powers.
What American presidential candidate do Mexicans support? Surprisingly, it's someone named Eerily Cleantone.
A is for Apple, B is for Bait, C is for Car D is for Harambe.﻿
Roses are red... Violets are violet,
That guy who hit that skyscraper was a really bad pilot.
Don’t sleep with politicians. 
They have aides.
Did you know 94% of Fords are still on the road? The other 6% made it home. 
Finding girls is like playing blackjack. I always try to go for 21 but end up hitting on 14.
I got a solid gold straw for my birthday. Honestly, it sucks.
Why couldn't Cain make offerings to God as well as his brother? Because he just wasn't Abel.
A monkey was arrested today for throwing feces at zoo employees 3 employees were rushed to the hospital for turd degree burns
What do you call someone who went into a birth clinic and started shooting at everyone there? Spawn camper.
I've finally worked out why Spain is so good at football. Nobody expects the Spanish in position.
People of USA are fed up of the current Presidential candidates and decided to hold a mass boycott As Americans hated all the candidates so much, that no one voted. The government is in a panic, trying to figure out what to do to decide who the next president will be. Finally, Barack Obama comes up with an idea: A literal presidential race. 

The three candidates would run a lap around the white house, and the best time would become president. Bernie Sanders goes first, but being as old as he is, he takes 24 minutes. Trump goes next and posts a time of 14 minutes 24 seconds. Hillary Clinton goes last, running as fast as she can in an effort to beat Trumps time. She finally crosses the finish line in just under 10 minutes. "Aha, that must be some kind of record!" she exclaims. 


"I don't think so," says Obama, "Bush did 9:11"
If attacked by a mob of clowns... Go for the juggler.
A French man is crying into his beer... ... Telling the bartender about the one who got away. "She was a beautiful Japanese woman, with eyes like the stars and hips round as the moon. We spent a night of passion together, taught each other some of our respective languages, and then parted with bittersweet tears in our eyes the next morning. Oddly, once we parted I found that my kneecap began to itch. Now I hunt the world over to find her again, to relieve the pain in my heart and the itch in my knee."


Heaving a sigh, he moaned, "Itchy knee, sans she...."
I got pretty sick last week, and then a centaur showed up! He said he was the Centaur for Disease Control.
The news have just reported that Greece will be stopping the export of Hummus and Taramasalata later this week... Experts are saying that this will lead to a double dip recession.
I got a knock knock joke for you. Two guys walk into a bar.
A dyslexic man... A dyslexic man walks into a bra.
Imagine if Lebron and Serena Williams had a baby... Of course it's impossible. Two men can't have a baby.
My dad is in the hospital, he needed to get some toes amputated because of his diabetes. He's been good about it. He says he's lactose intolerant.
*Knock Knock* *Knock Knock*

"Who's there?"

"Doctor."

"Doctor Who?"

"Why is everyone obsessed with that show?"
Me: Knock Knock You: Who's there?
Me: 9/11
You: 9/11 who?
Me: ...and you said you'd never forget...
It takes 1,437 bolts to assemble a car. It takes one nut to scatter them all over the road.  
  

Why did the kitchen renovator go to jail? For counterfeiting
What did the bad rapper get for Christmas? J Coal
We'll give him gold and frankincense But wait, there's myrrh. 

I'm not sorry. 😂
"What did two years of Spanish classes teach you in high school?" Nadar
Why were the workers of the twin towers sad? They ordered pepperoni but they got plane.
Who is Bush's favorite NFL Team? The New York Jets
If Reddit were around during the 2000 elections, who would they have voted? Neither. They'd just take the opportunity to make a hanging chad. 
My wife asked why I never eat at museum cafes I told her it was because the food is all old