Why did the chicken cross the road? Why did the chicken cross the road? "To get to the other side" Nope to get to the idiots house. "Oh"  knock knock "who's there?" The chicken.
What is Politics? A little boy goes to his dad and asks, "What is politics?"

 Dad says, "Well son, let me try to explain it this way: I’m the breadwinner of the family, so let’s call me capitalism. 
Your Mom, she’s the administrator of the money, so we’ll call her the Government. 
We’re here to take care of your needs, so we’ll call you the people. 
The nanny, we’ll consider her the Working Class. 
And your baby brother, we’ll call him the Future. 
Now, think about that and see if that makes sense," 

So the little boy goes off to bed thinking about what dad had said. Later that night, he hears his baby brother crying, so he gets up to check on him. He finds that the baby has severely soiled his diaper. So the little boy goes to his parents’ room and finds his mother sound asleep. Not wanting to wake her, he goes to the nanny’s room. Finding the door locked, he peeks in the keyhole and sees his father in bed with the nanny. He gives up and goes back to bed. 

The next morning, the little boy says to his father, "Dad, I think I Understand the concept of politics now." The father says, "Good son, tell me in your own words what you think politics is all about." The little boy replies, "Well, while Capitalism is screwing the Working Class, the Government is sound asleep, the People are being ignored and the Future is in deep shit."
A teacher asked her students... A teacher asked her 4th grade students a question every Thursday afternoon at the end of the day saying if they got it right they would not need to come to school Friday.

The first week she asks "how many stars in the galaxy?" No students had the answer.

The next week she asks"how many grains of sand are there on the beaches in Florida?" Nobody had an answer. 

The kids were getting frustrated, and little Billy told them "don't worry, I have an idea."

Billy came to school Thursday with 2 billiard balls that were painted black. As the teacher stands up to ask her question at the end of the day, Billy rolls the balls down towards the front of the room.

The billiard balls crash against her desk and the students laugh. The teacher shouts "ok! Who is the comedian with the black balls!?"

Billy jumps from his seat, strolls toward the door and says "Kevin Hart. See you on Monday!"
I bought a Fleetwood Mac GPS for my car. 
It's useless though. It just keeps telling me to go my own way.
A man flying in a hot air balloon suddenly realizes he’s lost. A man flying in a hot air balloon suddenly realizes he’s lost. He reduces height and spots a man down below. He lowers the balloon further and shouts to get directions, “Excuse me, can you tell me where I am?”
The man below says: “Yes. You’re in a hot air balloon, hovering 30 feet above this field.”
“You must work in Information Technology,” says the balloonist.
“I do” replies the man. “How did you know?”
“Well,” says the balloonist, “everything you have told me is technically correct, but It’s of no use to anyone.”
The man below replies, “You must work in management.”
“I do,” replies the balloonist, “But how’d you know?”*
“Well”, says the man, “you don’t know where you are or where you’re going, but you expect me to be able to help. You’re in the same position you were before we met, but now it’s my fault.”
What do you call a bear with no teeth A gummy bear
An Englishman, a Frenchman, a ravishing blonde and a homely brunette... ...are sharing a compartment on a train as it winds its way through the Alps. Every now and then the train passes through a tunnel, during which time the compartment is plunged into complete darkness. On one such occasion, a ringing slap is heard and as the train passes back into daylight, the Frenchman is rubbing his sore, red cheek.
The brunette thinks 'I bet that dirty Frenchman fondled the blonde and she struck the pervert.'
The blonde thinks 'I bet that filthy Frenchman was looking to grope me in the dark, mistook the dowdy brunette for me and she slapped the beast.'
The Frenchman thinks 'I bet that perfidious Englishman touched up the blonde in the dark and she slapped me by mistake.'
The Englishman thinks 'I can't wait for another tunnel so I can slap that French twat again.'
A profilactic check-up with the dermatologist at a coal mine. In comes a miner, the doctor tells him to undress and peel back the skin of his penis.

"What's that bubblegum doing there", asked the doctor.

"Well, the mines are all sooty and dusty and that's the only clean place down there."

"What's with the second piece of bubble gum next to it?"

"Oh, that one's Ahmed's, he has nowhere to put it."
3 guys die in a car crash and go to hell they all appear at the gates of hell and are greeted by satan himself

satan says to the first man "whats your favorite thing in the world?"

the man says "i love getting drunk just shit faced all the time"

satan opens a door and inside is every alcoholic drink you can imagine

the man walks in drooling at what he sees 

satan says "see you in 1000 years" and locks the door behind him

satan says to the second man "whats your favorite thing in the world?"

the man says "i love getting pussy man i live to fuck dude"

satan opens a door and inside is the most beautiful women he could imagine"

he runs in full sprint and satan says "see ya in a 1000 years" and locks the door

satan walks up to the last man and says "how bout you?"

the man says "i love smoking weed man, i haven't been sober since i was 10"

satan opens a door and inside is every strain of cannabis in the world and a few strains specific to hell"

the man walks in slowly 

satan says you already know" and locks the door

1000 yars pass and satan checks up on the 3 guys

the first guy is laying in a puddle of his own puke with broken bottles everywhere

the second man runs out screaming "im gay im gay!"

the last man satan was shocked by

the 3rd man is laying in the fetal position silent

satan says "are you ok?"

and the man with a single tear in his eye looks up to satan and says "hey man... you got a light?"
Did you hear the Coco Pops monkey was recently murdered? Tony the Tiger, Snap, Crackle and Pop all got killed too. 

Police think its the work of a serial killer. 
A doctor once told me that it's important to get 8 hours of beauty sleep per day But to be honest I think you need 9
Three counsellors die and go to Hell... [OC] A Person Centred counsellor, a Gestalt therapist and a CBT practitioner are all travelling back from a conference together in a car when they slip on some ice, the car crashes down a hill and they all die.

As there’s no such thing as God, they awake at the gates of Hell. Already the smell of brimstone and black smoke assault their senses and they can’t see more than a few feet in front of them.

A shape moves though the smoke towards them and as it clears they see Satan towering over them with a wild manic grin and all three men are gripped by terror.

First Satan walks over the Person Centred counsellor and speaks in a booming voice “Welcome to hell mortal. How does it feel to know you are now a slave in my kingdom for all eternity?”

Being a good counsellor he immediately communicates the core conditions and replies “I really value your interest in me but I’m wondering if we should focus on you. I had the sense you’re trying to keep me at a distance and that’s okay”

Satan is a little stunned by this answer and decides to have the poor man dragged away by demons to see if hot pokers can get a more sensible answer from him and he moves on to the gestalt therapist, standing over the man still sat on the ground.

Once again he speaks in his booming voice “Welcome to hell mortal. How does it feel to know you are now a slave in my kingdom for all eternity?”

The gestalt counsellor seems to be deep in thought for a moment and then begins to speak “I have a strong awareness of something in my lungs and I’m not sure where that’s coming from. It may be the toxic fumes or perhaps some unfinished business being triggered from my relationship with my father… And of course there a really warm sensation in my ass and that’s really interesting because….”

Satan cuts off this rambling speech and signals for the demons to drag him away too with a wave of his hand, a weary sigh and an exasperated look. Finally he moves on the CBT practitioner and stands over him and trying to look as scary as he can.

Again he asks “Welcome to hell mortal. How does it feel to know you are now a slave in my kingdom for all eternity?”

The CBT practitioner knows that it doesn’t matter what happens to him, it’s all about how he reacts to things. He may have died, awoken in hell and seen his two friends dragged away by demons but so long as he can maintain positive thoughts then not even these things can upset him.

He looks up at the intimidating figure before him and simply replies, “Oh it’s fine. I’m not really here”
What's the difference between sarcasm and lying? I don't know, I'm just the president.
Son: “Dad, I have a question regarding sex with my underage girlfriend.“ Father: “Yes?“

Son: “Could you stop doing that?“
They should make birth control for men Because it makes more sense to fire blanks than shoot at a bulletproof vest.

Recent discoveries will make this joke obsolete, thought I'd give it one more run.
People say that counting sheep jumping over a fence makes you to to sleep. However, Donkeys are much more effective... You're completely out as soon as your ass leaps.
They say you're attracted to people that look like you. That explains why I like women with big breasts.
I invited the girl I'm dating over for dinner. While we were all sat at the table, there was complete silence. It made me feel very uncomfortable.

I said, "Why does it feel like there's an elephant in the room?"

"Because there is," said my dad, looking at the girl.
I don't have OCD... I know because I've checked 300 times
I wish life was like a hairstyle So you could just cut it off and get a new one
What do you call a Scotsman who works in a cloakroom? Angus McCoatup
A Matchmaker walks into a bar... They see 5 people in there, 2 pair of couples and a stag.  One of the couple is a Gothic couple and a Nerdy Couple.


The Matchmaker talks to the Gothic couple and says to the couple "You're gonna laid tonight."


The Gothic couple replies "How would you know that?"


The Matchmakers states that its because they feel that are emotionally strong for each other.


The Matchmaker then goes to the nerdy couple and says "You're gonna get laid tonight."


The nerdy couple ask "Why?"


The Matchmaker says its because they are mentally strong for each other.


Finally the Matchmaker goes to the stag and says "You're gonna get laid tonight."


The man replies "Really?  How do you know?"


The matchmaker replies "Because I am physically stronger than you."
Why did God create vaginal mycose? So women too can know what it is to live with an irritated cunt.  
A women got a wooden breast implant yesterday.... it would be a funny joke if this had a punch line... Wooden tit 
How does a farmer count his cows? With a COWculator...

But, what if they all have babies?

Then he MOOtiplies them!

Man, I'm really milking these puns for more than they're worth...
When I first got my licence my mother always told me... "It's not you I'm worried about,  it's the other guys." Which is wrong.... Guys aren't the only problem. *pulls down visor mirror and applies eyeshadow, and lipstick while simultaneously posting to snapchat.*
My new personal trainer encouraged me to do do fifteen push-ups every commercial break on TV Man... I love Netflix!
Apple likes to leave things out of their products. The phone I bough from them doesn't have a headphone jack... and the car I bought from them doesn't have windows.
Peanut butter was driving his toast when suddenly... ..there was a jam
What tastes good on pizza but not on pussy? Crust
Did you hear about that female celebrity who was murdered? Me: Who was it?

Dad: I think her first name was Reese

Me: Witherspoon?

Dad: No it was with a knife
A man named Rob got his identity stolen. I guess you could say he got... *robbed*
I just got done doing squats and I gotta say... It's a huge weight off my shoulders
What did the goose say when he found out about flying south? Wanna hear migrate idea?
Did you hear about the midget clairvoyant who escaped from prison the other day? Police are looking for a small medium at large.
Set a fire for a man, And you'll keep him warm for a night.

Set a man on fire, and you keep him warm for the rest of his life.
How many cops does it take to screw in a lightbulb Just one, unless it's a black light.
do androids dream of electric sheep? Not unless they're Welsh
After a lengthy debate, congress finally passed a law banning pedophiles from children's shoe stores. It was No Minor Feet.
Where does a redditor drown? In the sea of reposts.
The Lawyer and the Engineer A lawyer and an engineer are sitting next to each other on a long flight from LA to NY. The lawyer leans over to him and asks if he would like to play a fun game. The engineer just wants to take a nap, so he politely declines and rolls over to the window to catch a few winks. The lawyer persists and explains that the game is really easy and a lot of fun. He explains "I ask you a question, and if you don't know the answer, you pay me $5, and visa-versa." Again, he politely declines and tries to get some sleep. 

The lawyer, now some what agitated, says, "Okay, if you don't know the answer you pay me $5, and if I don't know the answer, I will pay you $50!" figuring that he will easily win the match. This catches the engineer's attention and, figuring that there will be no end to this torment unless he plays, agrees to the game. 

The lawyer asks the first question. "What's the distance from the earth to the moon?" The engineer doesn't say a word, reaches in to his pocket, pulls out a $5 bill and hands it to the lawyer. Now, it's the engineer's turn. He asks the lawyer: "What goes up a hill with three legs, and comes down with four?" The lawyer looks at him with a puzzled look. He takes out his laptop computer and searches all his references. He taps into the Airphone with his modem and searches the Net and the Library of Congress. Frustrated, he sends e-mails to all his coworkers and friends. All to no avail. 

After over an hour, he wakes the engineer and hands him $50. The engineer politely takes the $50 and turns away to get back to sleep. The lawyer, who is more than a little miffed, wakes the engineer and asks, "Well, so what IS the answer!?" Without a word, the engineer reaches into his pocket, hands the lawyer $5, and goes back to sleep
What does Batman take with his alcohol? Just ice
Ooly Booly A young man is flying over the oceans with a small plane, until suddenly his engine fails. There is no way for him to stear back to the mainland and so he crashes on a small unknown island. 

He managed to survive the crash and decides to walk around in the forest to look for food. After some time in the forest, SNAP, he activates a trap and is now hanging upside down in a tree. 

A small group of tribe members cut him down and take him to the tribe leader that only speaks the sentence "Ooly Booly, or chop your head", without a single doubt the young man yells "please Ooly Booly" and gets mounted from behind by one of the tribe members.

With slight pain and a lot of regret he is released in the forest. Completely dissorrientated he runs away in a random direction  and again, SNAP he is hanging upside down.

Dragged in front of the chief he hears again "Ooly Booly, or chop your head". But this time there is 3 natives standing next to the chieften licking their tongues. Knowing what is about to happen but no other acceptable option he says "Ooly Booly" and turn for turn the 3 tribe members have a go at him. 

Hardly able to walk and completely humiliated he pushes himself through to forest trying to avoid any traps. Seeing the sea come closer, he feels that this time he will make it, but.. SNAP, again upside down. 

This time hearing the words "Ooly Booly or chop your head" and seeing a group of 10 natives licking their tongues, he knows he is done for. So he gathers enough courage to mumble the words "chop my head" to which the chief replays "sure.. but first Ooly Booly!"
The Godfather and his Attorney The Godfather, accompanied by his attorney, walks into a room to meet with his accountant. The Godfather asks the accountant, "Where's the three million bucks you embezzled from me?" The accountant doesn't answer. The Godfather asks again, "Where's the three million bucks you embezzled from me?" 

The attorney interrupts, "Sir, the man is a deaf-mute and cannot understand you, but I can interpret for you." 

The Godfather says, "Well, ask him where the @#!* money is." The attorney, using sign language, asks the accountant where the three million dollars is. The accountant signs back, "I don't know what you're talking about." The attorney interprets to the Godfather, "He doesn't know what you're talking about." The Godfather pulls out a pistol, puts it to the temple of the accountant, cocks the trigger and says, "Ask him again where the @#!* money is!" 

The attorney signs to the accountant, "He wants to know where it is!" The accountant signs back, "Okay! Okay! The money's hidden in a suitcase behind the shed in my backyard!" The Godfather says, "Well, what did he say?" The attorney interprets to the Godfather, "He says that you don't have the guts to pull the trigger."
The Greatest Pig... A man was visiting his worldly uncle on his farm, when a pig in a wheeled cart trotted past him, missing its two hind legs. He leaned over to his uncle and asked "Uncle, what happened to that pig in the wheelchair?"

The uncle takes a deep draw of his pipe and points to the pig. "I owe that pig my life, my wealth and the love of my beloved wife."

"All that?"

"I reckon, yes. See, years ago when I got the pig, I was planning to roast it whole. But, I got a little drunk and fell asleep, bout that time a wire went bad in the walls and the house caught fire! That pig though, it was so damn smart it managed to drag me to safety until help arrived."

"That's incredible!"

"A few days later, I was still trying to recover my belongings from the fire when the pig nosed up an old chest that'd been hidden under my floorboards! Wouldn't you know it, the thing was un-liftably filled with silver treasures. I had it all into a vault in the bank within the day and never needed to worry on expenses ever again."

"The blind luck!"

"Oh yes, but see, while I was busy counting those many silver pieces, a single gold ring tumbled out of the pile and the pig picked it up with it's teeth and took off running down the street! I had to run to catch up with it for several blocks, I finally caught up and kneeled down to fetch the ring from it's mouth when I looked up and saw the most gorgeous woman I'd ever seen. She thought I was proposing! We had a grand laugh about it over lunch, and almost a month later I proposed to her for real, with that very ring. Yes sir, that pig has been my most loyal companion for years now."

"This is all so overwhelming, all this from a pig with just two legs?"

"Oh, no, it had more, just didn't seem right to eat it all at once."
Reasonable Doubt A defendant was on trial for murder. There was strong evidence indicating guilt, but there was no corpse. 

In the defense’s closing statement the lawyer, knowing that his client would probably be convicted, resorted to a trick. 

"Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I have a surprise for you all," the lawyer said as he looked at his watch. "Within one minute, the person presumed dead in this case will walk into this courtroom." 

He looked toward the courtroom door. The jurors, somewhat stunned, all looked on eagerly. A minute passed. Nothing happened. 

Finally the lawyer said, "Actually, I made up the previous statement. But you all looked on with anticipation. I, therefore, put it to you that there is reasonable doubt in this case as to whether anyone was killed and insist that you return a verdict of not guilty." 

The jury, clearly confused, retired to deliberate. A few minutes later, the jury returned and pronounced a verdict of guilty. 

"But how?" inquired the lawyer. "You must have had some doubt; I saw all of you stare at the door.

The jury foreman answered: "Oh, we looked. But your client didn’t."
Give a man a fish and he'll eat for a day. Give a fish a man and he'll eat for a year.
My Iraqi friend found a silver lining on the Muslim travel ban My Iraqi friend found a silver lining on the Muslim travel ban. He said "at least my mother-in-law can't come and visit." Well, at least he found something to laugh about XD 
What do Irish plumbers earn for overtime? Time an' a Turd.
An Irishman walks into a bar... Just kidding he was born there and never left
My apologies. Two punjabi neighbours are arguing over whose fence is better. One says, "Your fence isn't even waterproof. You didn't picket correctly". The other slaps the first. Enraged the first shouts, "How dare you. What gave you the right to slap me."  The second neighbour replies, "It's not my right, it's my state. It's my Pun-job". 
I was in a bar yesterday... when suddenly realised i needed to fart. The music was really loud, so i timed my farts with the beat of the music. After a couple of songs, i started to feel better. I finished my beer and noticed that many people were staring at me. I Then suddenly remembered i had been listening to my iPod
Is this the bus for dyslexic kids? Oops, wrong sub. 
I'm gonna tell you an oxygen and potassium joke, OK?
A man walks down the street wearing a pineapple on his head Another man noticing him and asks:
"Umm, sir? Do you realize you have a pineapple on your head?"
"Well... yeah", he says.
-"But... why?"
-"Dude! I wears pineapple on my head every Tuesday!"
-"But... today is Wednesday..."

The man quickly removes the pineapple from his head and yells: "Oh god, i feel so stupid!"

Why did the mortician cross the road? To get to the other suicide
A woman gives birth to twins An old fisherman and his wife settle down and decide to have some kids. The wife ends up giving birth to twins, both boys. Eventually as the babies grow the couple notice that the two never face the same way. Wherever one of them looks the other is always facing the opposite direction, no matter what they do. The couple decide to name them Toward and Away.

The kids grow and have a happy childhood despite this strange behavior and when they turn 10 years old their father decides he wants to teach them to learn how to be fishermen like him. He teaches them all the tools of the trade, the right knots to tie, the proper way to care for the equipment, how to steer the boat and catch the wind in the sails, and all the other ins and outs of the trade.

One day the three head out on a fishing trip together. The mother kisses them goodbye, wishes them well, and watches as they sail off. Three week.s go by before the father, and only the father, returns, looking haggard and gaunt.

"What on Earth happened?!" exclaims the wife upon his return. "You were gone for so long that I had almost given up hope. Where are our sons?"

"My dear," says the man, "I'm afraid they are dead. I only barely survived myself."

"What happened to you?" asks the wife.

"Well, the day we set sail we found a great school of fish and were catching many large fish to bring home. Suddenly an enormous fish, bigger than the boat, lept out of the water and capsized us with the wave that came from it. We were flung into the water where we clung to driftwood to stay afloat. As we tried to get back together the fish breached again, swallowing Toward in its great jaws."

"Oh, my, that's terrible!"

"It is, but you should have seen the one that got Away!"
Why did the robot kill someone with its empty battery? So it would get charged with murder.
The English Teacher in India Teacher: Tell me a sentence that starts with an "I".

Student: I is the....

Teacher: Stop! Never put 'is' after an "I". Always put 'am' after an "I".

Student: OK. I am the ninth letter of the alphabet.
What Did The Orange Say To The Apple Are you really that stupid? Oranges can't talk.
What's the difference between a dirty bus stop and a lobster with boobs? One is a crusty bus station, and the other is a busty crustacean. 
Why is your nose in the middle of your face? Because it is the scenter!
Wanna know how to brighten the day of everyone on Earth? A few dozen strategically placed warheads should do the trick.
A poem. I am a little girl,

I have a little thing

That when I go to bed,

I put my finger in.

Now I'm much older,

My thing had lost its charm

And now it takes 5 fingers,

And half my fucking arm.
So I bought a new chair today Guess you can say I'm SATisfied.
What went through Hitler's mind before he died? "If I wasn't so distracted by taking over the world I could have killed so many more jews."
What do you call the Pope when he is sleepwalking? A Roamin' Catholic.
Two couples are playing cards at the table, and someone accidentally knocks them to the floor.. Two couples are playing cards at the table, and someone accidentally knocks them to the floor.  One of the men goes under the table to pick up the cards, and as he looks up he can see up his friend's wife's dress and that she isn't wearing any underwear.

Blushing coming up from the table, he sets the cards down and they continue to play.  A little while later while going to get a drink from the fridge, the other wife approaches him and asks, "When you were looking for the cards, did you find anything to your liking?"

Awkwardly, he replies, "Actually yes, I did."

"If you'd like some more, show up tomorrow at 1 pm and bring 100$.  You can like it a little more then.", she whispers to him.

He kindly agrees and the next day he shows up at 1 pm with 100$.  He hands her the money and they proceed to have at each other, in every conceivable way, for several hours.  After the deed is done, he leaves the house.

Holding the money in her hand, the phone rings 10 minutes later.  It's her husband, "Hey, did Mike come by today at around 1 pm?"

Ashamed and a little frightened, she says, "Uh, yes he did."

"Did he happen to give you 100$?", he replies promptly.

Her heart sinks, "Y-y-yes, he did."

"Ah, ok.  Good.  He came by earlier and asked to borrow 100$.  He said he'd drop it off at the house today at 1 pm"
3 drunk guys enter a taxi 3 drunk guys enter a taxi. The taxi driver knew that they were drunk, so he starts the engine and turns it off again. 

Then said, "we have reached your destination". 

The 1st guy gives him the money and the 2nd guy says "Thank you". 

The 3rd guy slaps the driver. The driver is shocked, thinking the 3rd drunkard knew what he did. 

But then he asks "what was that for?" The 3rd guy replies, " Control your speed next time, you nearly killed us! 
What is the best method of transportation for Jews? A dustpan
What do you get when you crossbreed a Chihuahua with a German Shepherd? A que-nein.
I told my husband there are 100 days until our baby's delivery He said "That's a really long time. You should really use Prime next time".
I hate German chefs They're suck kochs.
What is the sound of one hand clapping? Amputees anonymous
Pun competition One day, a man was sitting at home with a beer in hand when he read about a pun competition being held downtown. He got up early the next morning and came up with the best puns he had ever seen, and entered his 10 best puns hoping he would win, but unfortunately no pun in 10 did.
What's Donald Trumps favorite kind of dog? a BORDER collie!
Whats the difference between ET and an illegal alien? ET learned English and wanted to go home.
My girlfriend has a lot of trust issues. Well, one of them does. 
One night, a man walks into a bar looking sad... The bartender asks the man what he wants.

The man says, “Oh, just a beer."

The bartender asked the man, “What's wrong, why are you so down today?”

The man said, “My wife and I got into a fight and she said she wouldn't talk to me for a month.”

The bartender said, “So what's wrong with that?”

The man said, “Well, the month is up tonight.”
What do you call Arab porn? XXXPlosive
Why couldn't the japanese police catch the black man? because he nigeru
A radio station in Ireland is taking calls to find a word that is commonly used but isn't in the dictionary yet... The first caller gets through.

"Hello! What word do you think should be in the dictionary?"

"Goan!"

"Goan? Can you use it in a sentence?"

"Yeah, go'an fuck yerself!" The caller then begins laughing until the station can cut off his call.

After several more calls they get another man,

"And what's your word sir?"

"Smee!"

"Can you use it in a sentence?"

"Aye! S'mee again! Go'an fuck yerself!"
Girls call me shortcut My penis is circumcised and 3 inches long
Where does Phil Collins record his songs? In a stu-stu-studio.
Cancer runs in my family. July was a very popular month to have babies.
February 10th should be National Fart Day. Because it's 2/10.
What's the Difference between Marlin the Fish and Walter White? One's finding Nemo the other one is funding Chemo!
A priest has diarrhea Holy shit!!!!
How many freudians does it take to screw in a lightbulb? Two. One to screw in the lightbulb and another to hold the peni... LADDER!
Donald Trump uses a special steroid to stay ahead in the game. Orange juice.
What do you call a teenage Hitler Zitler
So a man walks into a bar... ... and he goes straight to the bartender. He orders a grasshopper and a screwdriver, and pays with a $100 bill. 


The bartender, not thinking much of it, simply gives the man his drinks and his change. The man then drinks both of the beverages.


The man then spots a good friend across the bar, and notices that his friend is with a woman that looked nothing like the friend's wife. The man confronts his friend when he is alone, and the friend says


"Actually, that's my sister. She's visiting town from Pittsburgh."


The friend then pulls out his phone and proves this with some family photos and their last few text conversations. The man, realizing he misunderstood the situation, apologizes to his friend and his sibling and walks out of the bar, wishing both of them a good night.


The man walks down the street when he watches two people dressed as apes, three women dressed as clowns, and two kids in a tandem horse costume. The man knows it is Halloween, so this succession of people doesn't phase him or anyone else on the sidewalk.


The man reaches his house and, noting that the lights are off, quietly unlocks the door so as to not wake up his sleeping wife. He slowly tiptoes his way up the stairs when he misses a step and stumbles down three stairs. This wakes up his wife, and she walks out of their bedroom and says


"Are you okay sweetie?"


"Yeah," the man says, "I just stumbled a bit. Sorry I'm late, I ran across Jim at the bar and we had a chat."



"It's alright, honey. Just get to bed soon, okay? I need you to get Billy to his friend's birthday party tomorrow."


"Okay, sweetest." Said the man. He doesn't really want to do it, since it means he has to talk with the other kids' parents while he's there, and the man isn't very good at small talk.



But he loves his son, so he will do it anyway. The man undresses and lays down on the bed, content with the day he had.
What's the first thing Eskimos teach their kids? Don't eat yellow snow.
My stomach hasn't felt well all day, I'm like a bartender during an earthquake... I'm having trouble controlling my stools.
If a girl sleeps with 100 guys she gets called a slut. What do you call a guy who does the same thing? A homosexual.
Boyfriend suggesting For Prisma Girl Friend, i am not able to install prisma app in my mobile.

Boyfriend: Check your phone storage is full.

Girl Friend: Hhmm, is there any alternative of this app?

Boy Friend: Yes, Take Selfie Without Make up
My phone fell from the 20th floor, good thing it was in airplane mode.
When life gives you lemons... why do you use a bra?
Napping at work Sometimes, when I'm sure people can only see the back of my head, I enjoy sneaking in a quick catnap at work. They never last too long though, invariably someone rings the bell telling me they want to get off my bus.
Two vampire bats were hanging arround Suddenlly the first one states: "I'm hungry, I'm going to grab a bite to eat" and he flies off.

Half an hour later he returns with a huge smile on his face and blood on his chin.

The other bat asks: "Did you get your fill?"

"Oh boy did i ever. Do you see that red roofed barn way over there?"

"Ahha"

"Well beyond that barn there is a huge herde of cows... an all you can eat bufette"

So the second bat gets excited and flies off.

45 minutes latter he returnes with a gloom expression and a face full of blood. "Do you see that big church tower over there?" He asks his friend.

"Yeah, I see it"

"Well I sure as hell didn't"
A demolition expert goes on stage during open mic night... He proceeds to bring the house down.
I'm sorry I said "nice phone" When you showed me a picture of your baby..
Two old timers were playing chess in the park. The first one says: "know what I did yesterday? I went to the girls..." "At your old age?" Says the second one as he cuts him off. "How was it?" He asks in anticipation

"Much nicer than the boys"

Edit: dunno if this translates well enough
A redhead walks into the Dr. Office..... She sits down on the examining table and tells the Doctor "I think I am going to die. I hurt all over. I touch my arm and it hurts, I my head and it hurts. I touch my abdomen and it hurts."

The doctor looks at her and says, "Let me guess that you are naturally blonde."

"Why yes, How did you guess?"

"Because you have a broken finger." 

A blonde, a brunette, and a redhead are stranded on an island... The island is 10 miles from shore and without any other possible way to leave, the woman decide swimming is the only way off. The redhead goes first, she manages to make it 3 miles before she gets tired and drowns. The brunette then goes after, she makes it farther than the redhead but still finds herself tired and drowns five miles away from shore. Finally, it's the blonde's turn. She makes it five miles before feeling and tired and swims back to the island.
How do you destroy a feminist in a debate? You ask "what rights do men have that women don't?"
How do you tell apart the voices in Donald Trump's head from the voices in Steve Bannon's? Trump's voices mumble praise of himself, Bannon's shriek racial epithets, and both are silent when Russia Telecom has an outage.
We should make all vehicles be driven by Stormtroopers They never hit anything so there would be no accidents.
My girlfriend slept over last night and asked to use my shower this morning... "You can use any soap or shampoo that's in the shower. I set a clean towel on the counter for you and pushed the stool under the sink so you won't trip over it."

She replied, "I'd prefer it if you flushed any stool down the toilet, but as long as I don't trip on it I guess we're okay."
A memorable first time One day a father tells his son "You're 18 now, and I think it's time you learned about the birds and the bees, so take this duck and go over to this brothel and see what you can do."

Slightly confused, the son heads over to the brothel with the duck and meets with one of the women there. The son explained the situation to the lady and told her that even though he has no money, he does have this duck. The woman thinks for a while, and decides to take the duck as payment since she knew a guy that could help her prepare the duck so that she could cook it for dinner.

So after they have sex, the woman is flabbergasted at just how magnificent the son was in bed. She even offered him a freebie but being the polite guy that he is, he refused. So the woman, desperate for another round, offered the duck back as payment, the son agrees and so they have sex again. 
Later, the son leaves the brothel with the duck. On their way back home a truck appears, seemingly out of nowhere, and hits the duck, killing it. Feeling bad, the driver offers to pay the son for the duck. Not knowing how much it was worth the son settles for $20. The driver happily obliges, pays him the $20, and they both go on their ways.

Finally the son gets home when his dad asks him "So son, how was it?" The son replies "I dunno dad, you tell me." "Ok, so tell me what happened" replied the dad. The son replied "Well dad, I got a fuck for a duck, a duck for a fuck, and 20 bucks for a fucked up duck."
Itching penis I went to a urologist because the head of my penis was itching.
He told me I had an infection and that I should soak my penis in alcohol.
The itching has stopped but now my Jack Daniels tastes funny.
I can't tell whether my new car's suspension is amazing, or if I'm a sociopath Either way when I ran over that pedestrian I didn't feel a thing.
Why did Vegeta name his son Trunks? ...find out on the next episode of Dragon Ball Z
Americans make the best jokes... Sorry I meant President.
Have y'all heard of the cow that produces milk that taste like that stuff of myths? 





It's legen-dairy
I was recently diagnosed with Alzheimer's and Cancer The cancer sucks, but at least I don't have Alzheimer's!

Wait

No

I do

I can feel the edges of my mind unraveling; each piece, once so firmly put together, slowly falling away from my grasp. To know that the mind, the seat of who you are, can simply... disintegrate, like a mighty sandcastle in the tide...

Well, at least I don't have cancer.
Why do brides traditionally wear white? So they match the stove, the fridge and the dishwasher.
What's an amnesiac's favorite cheese? Camembert
[short] what is Forrest Gump's password? 1forrest1
Ice Cream Why did the little boy drop his ice cream? He got hit by a bus.
I was told that the friendship between sodium, potassium, and oxygen was bad. I said, "Na. Pretty sure it is OK."

EDIT: Should have switched potassium and oxygen around. Dang it...
I don't really like food from Spain much but... To chicharrón I guess
Two cows are standing in a field in Canada in the year 2003. One cow turns to the other and says, "we gotta watch out. I hear mad cow disease has been spreading through the herd." The other cow looks towards him and says, "what are telling me for? I'm not a cow, I'm a duck!"
Organic chemistry is difficult Those who study it have alkynes of trouble.
I faked my death, but hardly anyone attended my funeral Apparently I faked it really badly
Why did Snoop Dogg bust out an umbrella? Fo drizzle 
Courtroom antics. Whats the best thing about being the smartest person in a courtroom?
Knowing they'll never find the bodies.
What's the difference between your penis and your tax return? She'll blow your tax return
The wife and I have recently been blessed with the pitter patter of tiny feet around our house. I hired a midget butler.
Why can't Hindi people fight with each other? Because they can't have beef!
Who is Wolverine's favorite author? Lemony Snikt

(I'm sorry...)
A chicken goes into the library. A chicken goes into the library, walks up to the librarian, and says, "Book."

The librarian says, "You want a book?"
"Book"
"Any book?"
"Book"

So the librarian gives the chicken a novel and off it goes. An hour later, the chicken come back and says, "Book-book."

The librarian says, "Now you want two books?" 

"Book-book."

So she give a chicken two more novels. The chicken leaves but again comeback an hour later. 

"Book-book-book."
"Three books?"
"Book-book-book."

So the librarian gives the chicken three books, but she decides she'll follow the chicken and finds out what is going on? And the chicken crosses the road, goes down the alley, out of town and towards the woods, into the woods and down to the river, down to the swamp, and there is a bull frog. The chicken sets the books down by him. The bullfrog looks at the books and says, "Reddit...Reddit...Reddit..."
What do you call a Jewish man with heartburn? An acidic Jew.
Are you sitting on the F5 key? Because dat ass is so refreshing!
Rainn Wilson to star in the next Harry Potter spin off! Fantastic Beets And Where To Find Them
I only lie to people I don't like. Don't worry, I like you.
Why did Eminem only have one biological kid?  
 

He only had one shot
Click here to see a pun ctuation mark.
A Teacher asks the students.. "Is it possible to insert 2 holes through one hole?"

Nobody is able to answer

Teacher: "You guys are so stupid. Go and ask your parents and come back tomorrow with an answer."

The next day too, nobody is able to answer the question.

Teacher: "Well, it seems your parents are stupid as well. See the answer is so simple."

Then the teacher makes a circle using his thumb and index finger and keeps it in front of his nostrils.

Teacher: "See, it was so simple, yet nobody was able to answer."

The next day, a student comes up to the teacher and says, "Sir, my father has asked if it's possible to insert 7 holes through one hole?"

Teacher: "No, that's impossible."

Students: "It is possible, my father said."

Teacher : "How?"

Student: "Take a flute and shove it up your ass."
My friend didn't get my RAM joke. DIMM wit.
I like my violence like I like I beer... ... domestic 
A bear is chasing a rabbit They make so much noise a genie pops up,
"If you two stop making so much noise and let me go back to sleep I will grant you two wishes each"

They agree and the beat goes first :
"I want a big dick."
/*Poof*/ Done

The rabbit thinks about for a while and says:
"I want a motorcycle."
/*Poof*/Done

Bear says:
"I want all the bears in the world to be female and always in heat."
/*Poof*/Done

Rabbit gets on his motorcycle and points at the bear:
"I want that bear to be gay."
/*WROOOOM*/

Edit spelling.
I have a pen, I have an apple, uh! iStylus
I only date black girls So I don't have to meet their fathers
What makes an ISIS joke funny? The execution.
My wife and I were happy for 25 years. Then we got married.
I redid my entire house with mirrors... You could say it really reflects who I am.
What do you call a lying bunny? A haretic
How do you call a Medieval midi music? Midival! Ha! Get it?
Load of animals in the back of a lorry.. The cow says "mooooooooove over"

The chicken says "fkaaaf"
My mom and my girlfriend don't get along. (NSFW?) My mom always blows me off. My girlfriend thinks she's getting replaced.
A sandwich walks into a bar and asks for a beer. The bartender takes one look at him and says, "We don't serve food here."
I was going to build a bridge for karma but I got over it.
Did you see the fight between the walnut and the pecan? It was nuts.
Life is a bit like my dick... It's long and hard.
I know a youtuber name SoWTF... He is sooo what the fuck.
My Journey from $60k College Debt to $115k Net Worth & 816 Credit Score. And all thanks to this community! I started stand up and got beat up. Settlement has been a blessing!
Why did Bach have 20 children? His organ didn't have any stops.
My Dicks Nickname is Bing Because noone ever uses it.
What do electricians say while they meditate? *Ohmmmm...*
What does the inappropriate strip club patron say when he finally admits he has a problem? I come here too often
I feel like most jokes about communism are pretty low effort But at least everyone gets them
A Font Designer and a Police Officer Walk Into a Bar... The font designer leaves sans sheriff.
The Bacon Tree Two Mexicans are stuck in the desert after crossing into the United States , wandering aimlessly and starving.

They are about to just lie down and wait for death, when all of a sudden Luis says:

"Hey Pepe, do you smell what I smell. Ees bacon, I theenk."

"Is, Luis, eet sure smell like bacon."

With renewed hope, they struggle up the next sand dune, & there, in the distance, is a tree loaded with bacon.

There's raw bacon, there's fried bacon, back bacon, double smoked bacon, every imaginable kind of cured pork.

"Pepe, Pepe, we ees saved! Ees a bacon tree!"

"Luis, maybe ees a meerage?

We ees in the desert don't forget."

"Pepe, since when deed you ever hear of a meerage that smell like bacon?

Ees no meerage, ees a bacon tree!"

With that, Luis staggers towards the tree.

He gets to within 5 yards, Pepe crawling close behind, when suddenly a machine gun opens up, and Luis drops like a wet sock.

Mortally wounded, he warns Pepe with his dying breath:

"Pepe, go back man, you was right, ees not a bacon tree!"

"Luis, Luis miamigo, what ees it?"

"Pepe ees not a bacon tree. Ees...

Ees...

Ees...

Ees...

Ees...

Ees...

Ees... a ham bush."

Why do stoners make lousy poker players? Because they keep smoking the pot.
Friends, DON'T SHAVE YOUR ASS-HAIR! I have recently made a mistake in my life, and I offer my story to you, that you may learn from my error. It all started, as many things do, with me having trouble shitting.

No, I was not constipated; this was not a regularity problem but a matter of technique. It seems my ass-hair had grown to such a length that tiny grogans (look it up) were constantly getting tied up in the matted jungle between my asscheeks. It led to much frustration, with me KNOWING that I still had something to drop, but unable to shake the tenacious turd loose from its butthair dwelling. Eventually I would have to do two things: either reach down with some paper and try to pinch off the lingering loaf (which required careful precision to avoid smearing the creature all over my rear, especially since I had no way of seeing what I was doing) or just go for broke, start wiping, and hope that I could remove all the leftover fecal matter before the toilet paper reached its Can't-Be-Flushed threshold.

I was contemplating this problem, when I had what seemed at the time to be a bright idea. "Hey! This is my butt and my butt-hair, right? So why don't I just eliminate all the hair, and then my grogans will flow out like beer from a keg!" I said to myself. It is a statement that will go down in history with a lot of other regretted statements. "How many Indians could there be?" said by General Custer. "Looks like a good day for a drive!" by JFK. "There! America On-Line now has complete Usenet access!" by some idiot system tech. Such was my anal shaving idea.

I performed the operation that night, with a cheap disposable razor and a towel to sit on. Starting from the bottom, and shaving from the crack to the cheeks, I began the arduous process of ridding my ass of hair. Occassionally, I would have to clean the razor of accumulated hair and miscellaneous slime, which I did by wiping it on the towel. Slowly, my twin mounds and the between-ravine began to resemble the hairless cheeks of a newborn baby. Finally, I wiped the razor one last time, and surveyed my work. The towel was covered with a pile of hair. My ass was smooth as ivory. I smiled, satisfied, thinking my troubles were over.

Little did I know.

I now have a great respect for anal-hair. Like everything in this world God created, it has its mighty purpose in existence. It was only after I had removed it that I started to learn how much I had been taking it for granted. For one, it provides friction. I learned this the next day, when I walked out into the sun heading for class. After climbing two flights of stairs and starting to sweat, I started to notice something unpleasant. The sweat was accumulating in my crack, and was causing the unpleasant sensation of my two asscheeks sliding past each other with every step. I thought about going to the bathroom and wiping it off, but had to get to class. Eventually, I thought, it would dry.

Unfortunately, it did dry, but only after mingling with the microscopic shit-molecules lingering around my brown starfish. When I stood up after class, my cheeks were stuck together with a slimy sticky shit/sweat combination. As I made my way back to my dorm, it started to itch. God-DAMN, did it itch! Felt like a swarm of ants was making its way up and down my crack. Fighting to keep from jamming my hand down there and scratching away, I rushed back to the dorm.

Unfortunately again, this exertion caused me to sweat, and when I finally reached my room, my cheeks were sliding back and forth against each other like a pair of horny cane-toads. I quickly dropped my pants, and attempted to dry my ass off by sticking it in front of a fan and spreading my cheeks. As I pulled the two mounds of flesh apart, a horrible stench burst free and filled the room. Every dog within a 4 block radius started to howl. I had it worst of all, as the ripe aroma of festering shit/sweat went into the fan and blew back into my face. I fought to keep from heaving. And as I sat there, fighting vomit, my ass cheeks spread and dripping, with the concentrated aroma of my body odor mixed with the tangy smell of my own shit blowing right into my face, I had only one thought: "It will be like this until the hair grows back. Weeks."

Later on, trying to deal as best I could, wiping my ass at every opportunity, I discovered another wonderful use for ass-hair - ventilation. I attempted to launch a fart, only to have it get stuck between my asscheeks. Apparently, with no hair, the two pink twins can get vacuum sealed together, and the result was a frustrating fart that slid up and down between my cheeks like a lost gerbil.

As if that wasn't enough, I am now enduring further torture. As anyone who has ever shaved anything knows, when hair is first growing in, it comes in as stubble. Imagine your ass having the texture of a brillo pad. Well, that is what I am dealing with now. It is a hellish torture, and there are many times when I just look out the window and contemplate why I shouldn't just jump out and get it all over with in one fleshy splat, rather than endure this constant agony.

Friends, DON'T SHAVE YOUR ASS-HAIR!
How do you drown a hipster? Throw them into the mainstream.
Why can't Stevie Wonder see his friends? He is busy making good music.
A impoverished brother and sister are trying to come up with ways to make a few extra bucks. The sister says "I'm going down to give blood. I hear they'll pay $20."
"Wow," says brother, "I'm going to go donate sperm, I hear that pays $100."
The sister angrily leaves the homeless shelter. 
The next day the brother seeing his sister leaving the homeless shelter he asks, "where are you headed to?"  
"Sperm bank," she says with her mouth full. 
Why did the full chromosome human go to war He was diploid
A Chinaman in Paris picks up a girl and takes her to his hotel room. He opens the bedroom window and takes a deep breath. Then, they get into bed together
and make love. After a while the Chinaman says, "Excuse me, I am a little tired."

He gets out of the bed, goes over to the window, takes a deep breath. Then he rolls under
the bed and comes out the other side. He jumps into bed and starts to make love again.

After a while, he gets up saying, "Excuse me, I am a little tired."

Again, he goes over to the window, and takes a deep breath, then he rolls under the bed and gets out the other side. He jumps back into bed and starts making love once more.

When this has happened five times, the girl gets up saying, "Excuse me, I am a little tired, too." She goes over to the window, takes a deep breath of air, looks under the bed and finds four Chinamen there.
A Catholic Priest finds a job. Dave the Catholic Priest needed a part time job. His salary was still quite low and he needed to save up while on vacation. So he got in contact with Francis, the Bishop, to get help in spreading word around local businesses that Dave was a good, honest chap ready to undertake work.

  In no time at all Dave got a break- fast food. 

  He showed up at 7 am for the first day. Jim, an old friend of Francis the Bishop, was sympathetic to Dave's cause and was happy in giving him a dozen hours a week. He was also aware of Dave's one flaw that Francis warned him about: Dave tended to daydream and become forgetful, aloof or even careless during monotonous tasks. This had led to him losing the Church keys on a few occasions. Leading Choir practice in the driving rain was not a pleasant experience.

 So Jim was on the lookout and intended to keep a keen eye on Dave's performance. 

  "Dave mate. I haven't trained you in food safety yet. So for this week you're responsible for keeping the joint clean before, during, and after the chippy is open for service. Right. Any questions? Good man,"

  So Dave was handed reign of all cleaning supplies and tasks. Days 1 and 2 went okay. Dave just about managed to prep the front of shop for the opening, though struggled keeping count of all the bits and bobs in inventory. Day 3 was a struggle. Dave, used to working in leisurely pace found wiping down tables and clearing trash in time quite taxing. More than once he left spray bottles around benches and behind doors. Customers were befuddled and Jim left frustrated at this incompetence.

  Jim stopped Dave on the morning of day 4. Trash was found under tables, counters left too greasy after ineffective wiping, and the supplies were whittled away almost to nothing but a sponge after Dave's mismanagement.

  "Jim, look I'm really sorry. But I'm getting the hang of this now! Please give me another role if you really don't me cleaning."

  So Jim complied. The next day Dave turned up at 6.30 am as per instruction.

  "Okay Dave. Fresh start. This job is a bit new and I'm sure you'll learn from it too. You need to collect the frozen supplies at the store. They've been paid for so don't worry. Just collect everything and race back in good time. If you know what I mean."

  Dave thought he knew exactly what Jim meant. 

  "So long as I drive quickly, I can take the rest of the day off!"

  Two hours later on what should have been a 15 minute trip, Dave entered the premises with a dejected expression.

  Ten minutes later Jim also wore the same expression, albeit with a scowl and high blood pressure to match; Dave had struck a streetlamp, mounted the sidewalk and blown out a tire in the process because he thought Jim wanted him to *race* back. With the company car out of service Jim was strained to keep things operational. Dave was becoming a liability.

  To the sheepish priest he said, "Dave. Final chance. I hired you as a favor, not a burden. From tomorrow work in the back with Phil on food. He'll give you something to do."

  Dave nodded vigorously, "Thank you so much Jim! I swear to it- I won't be forgetful or careless. You can count on me!"

  "Yeah. Good. Just don't burn this place down."

  6.30 am, the next day. Dozens of customers filed in and out every few hours, bellies filled, vinegary lips smacked. Jim didn't see much of Dave. Naturally he was quite nervous. No complaints over the phone for mixed up orders, or hair in the mayo, or dismembered digits in the salad. Maybe he should have put Dave there in the first place. The next day came and went. Another suspiciously uneventful day. Almost too quiet. "Don't fret too much", Jim thought to himself later on that Thursday evening. "Phil was happy with Dave's work and didn't mention any hiccups."

  A week passed in this way. Jim was in a good mood to say the least. Sales and profit had nearly increased by 500%; customers were actually leaving feedback on their experience for the first time in months; The company car was back from repairs, costs much lower than anticipated; the takeaway was still not destroyed in a fire, and Phil reported no missing items or mishap in the kitchen. Even Dave was in a good mood, starting and leaving his shifts with a smile on his face and lively spring in his step, giving him an almost surreptitious look.  

  It was nearing the end of Dave's vacation. Jim had just handed the last overtime paycheck to his star employee when he thought to ask something on his mind for a while now, "Dave, top job. You've done wonders to help this takeaway get back on its feet again. Everyone loves the food. Heck, even people from the next town over are calling in to order! So between us two men- how on earth do you cook so well? The battered fish is the talk of the town, so are the chicken wings- oh and the chips! They're so good they make you want to slap your mama! How have you done it!?"

  "It's nothing, really Jim!"

  "No, no! Please tell! You're one of us. Even if you're leaving, you can pop around to help any time you want at double your current wages. But please. How have you done it?"

  "It's simple, Jim," Dave said as he moved to lean forward, closing the gap between his boss. Involuntarily, an excited croak left Jim's throat.

  "Oh?" sweat beaded on his forehead.

   "Simple, Jim. I'm just a good friar."
How do you get gum out of your hair? Cancer.
Where do cousins come from? Aunt holes. 
I call my wife Bambi too..... Because I don't want her shot. Just her mom.
I ate at a Vietnamese restaurant but I used a fork. I guess you could say I made a pho-pas. 
Friend 1: Oi mate can I borrow your phone? Friend 2: Yeah sure, why'd you need it for?

F1: Well mines busted and I just wanna call me mum.

F2: Oh no problem mate here ya go, just hit redial.
A man from Wisconsin is travelling in Mexico... when he comes across a dairy farm. 

"Buenos noches, do you have any cheeze for sale?"

"Buenos, nochez"
I am a legal resident of the United States and I have not paid my taxes for the last 15 years. AMA! Thank you for your time. Ask me anything.

**EDIT:** Just a moment guys, someone is at my door.
An old woman walked into a sex toy shop... She wandered in the shop for a couple of minutes and finally she stopped and asked the vendor: How much is this one? He replied: Ma'am, that's a fire extinguisher.
What's black and slides down Nelson's Column? Winnie Mandela 
Why did Trump stage a photo op of him winning a marathon against a bunch of traffic signs? To show that he was leading the poles
Milking Machine A farmer ordered a high-tech milking machine. Since the equipment arrived when his wife was out of town, he decided to test it on himself first.

So, he inserted his "manhood" into the equipment, turned on the switch and everything else was automatic.

Soon, he realised that the equipment provided him with much more pleasure than his wife ever had. When the fun was over, though, he quickly realised that he couldn't remove the instrument from his penis.

He read the manual but didn't find any useful information on how to disengage himself. He tried every button on the instrument, but still without success. Finally, he decided to call the suppliers

Customer Service Hot Line with his mobile..

"Hello, I just bought a milking machine from your company. It works fantastic, but how do I remove it from the cow's udder?"

"Don't worry," replied the customer service rep, "The machine will release automatically once it's collected ten litres. Have a nice day."
Knock knock. Who’s there? Smell mop. (finish this joke in your head)
I'm so ugly that when... ... I passed out at a frat party I woke up with more clothes on.
Give a man a jacket and he'll stay warm all winter Teach a man to jacket and he'll stay warm his whole life
Timing You know the most important part of telling a joke?
A young boy asks his dad what the difference between a fanny and a cunt is Thinking he's old enough to learn, he tells the boy 'i'll show you! '
He takes his son upstairs where his wife is sleeping in bed. 
He lifts the sheets and points to his wife's vagina and says
' you see that?  That's a fanny'
'Oooh can i touch it?' Asks the kid.
'No!! You'll wake up the cunt! '
A farmer is milking his cow This is a translation of a Galician joke, feel free to correct any mistake/awkward phrasing 


A farmer is milking his cow, the cow whips him with her tail. -Fuckin' cow! The farmer keeps milking the cow, and the cow keeps whipping him. At the third whip, the farmer is really pissed with the cow, so he gets a stool, takes his belt off and ties the cow tail to the ceiling -Not so smart now, aren't you? His pants fall to the floor, and in that exact moment, his wife enters the cowhouse.

+Manolo! What the hell! 

-Look, if I tell you the truth you would not believe me anyway, so yea, I'm going to fuck this cow. 
what happens when you take a joke too far? The 45th president of the United States 
While examining me, my dentist asked me if i had recently performed oral sex Embarassed, i asked if i had a pube in my teeth.

He said no..there's shit on your nose
Parental settings for my virgin wifi? Where are the parental settings for my virgin wifi?
Give a man a fish and he'll eat for a day. Give a man a poisoned fish, and he'll eat for a lifetime.
I've made this new photo app and it's a thousand times better than Instagram. It's called Instakilo 
A Russian submarine A Russian submarine was sailing,and the captain felt a huge shake.Confused,he ran to Vladimir and asked him: "What was that,was it an earthquake or we hit something?",Vladimir said: "No Captain,Ivan's girlfriend ran with her lover to Venice", the captain even more confused says:Yeah,but what's the matter with that and the shake?Vladimir said:Well,there is no more Venice...

Valentine's Day Gift 
A young lady was caught napping one afternoon on Valentine's Day. She woke up when she heard the doorbell.

"I just dreamed that you gave me a pearl necklace for Valentine's day," she said to her boyfriend. "What do you think it means?"

"You'll know for sure tonight," he replied.

That evening, the young man arrived with a small package and gave it to his girlfriend. Delighted, she opened it and found a book entitled "The meaning of dreams." 
A guy walks into a restaurant orders a steamy soup After a while, the waiter comes back with the soup.
The guy tastes the soup and frowns at the waiter.
"Excuse me, i asked for a steamy soup, and that my friend, is not a steamy soup.
The waiter apologizes and tells him that he'll take care of that. 

The waiter comes back with the soup. The bowl is now boiling hot, and he uses towels to grab it.
The guy tastes the soup, spits it right out, and yelling at the waiter:
"What is so difficult to understand?! I want a steamy soup! I don't want it hot, i want a STEAMY FUCKING SOUP!!! 

...

After being heated for a long time in the highest temperature possible, and cooked in a maximum heating stove, the steamy soup is finally ready.
The waiter needs 5 towels on each side only to grab the bowl.
The bowl is carried on a maximum heated plate.
The whole restaurant becomes a sauna, and steams covers the entire place.

The sweaty waiter serves the soup to the guy.
The guys tastes the soup, and the waiter tensely looking at him.
The guy thinks for a while and than saying: "now this is what i call a steamy soup! Thank you very much!"
-"Your'e welcome!", says the waiter, and calmly returns to do his duties.

After the guy finishes the soup, a man approaching to him and says:
"Hey there, sorry to bother you, but i sat at the table over there and i couldn't help but looking at you! I have to ask you something!
-"Sure!", says the guy.
-"You are a pilot, right?"
-"Well yeah! How did you know?!"
-"I can tell by your uniform..."
My girlfriend said to me the other day, "Why did God give women periods with cramp pains, and men nothing?" I laughed and replied, "Don't be silly, he gave us women."
Went to Disneyland because my daughter is so obsessed with Mickey Mouse. She was so excited when I got home and told her.
What does Donald Trump use when his fax machine is broken? His alternative fax.
Apparently this was one of the jokes from East Germany before the fall of the Berlin Wall. A citizen orders a Trabant car. The salesman tells him to come back to pick it up in nine years. The customer asks: "Shall I come back in the morning or in the evening then?" 
 
"You're joking, aren't you?" 

 "No, not at all. It's just that I need to know whether the plumber can come at 3pm or not." 

(Credit to anonymous)
What do you call an actor that gets employed by trump? Alec Baldwin 
I used to think morning sex was the greatest thing ever... Until I started to share a cell with Bubba.
It's not that the Massacre at Bowling Green didn't happen... It was just an alternative event.
Why has there never been a coup d`état in america? Because there is no US-embassy in america.

(from german tv-satire "Die Anstalt")
How did the composer find his buddy on social media? He checked his franz liszt
What organization is the best at curve fitting? INTERPOL
Donkey In A Bar This man walks into a bar and sees a donkey. He askes the bartender why is there a donkey in here the bartender says if you can make this donkey laugh I will give you ten thousand dollars. So the man whispers in the donkey's ear and the donkey started laughing. Then the bartender said if you can make the donkey cry I will give you ten thousand more dollars. So the man turns to an angle where only the donkey can see and the donkey started crying. The bartender couldn't believe it so he asked the man how did you make the donkey laugh then make the donkey cry? He said first I told the donkey my dick was bigger than his, than I showed him. 

What do astronauts use to cook in space?? Marzipans!!
Strange Redneck Nick Name The redneck family down the street always called one of their boys Ant Eater and I could never figure out why.

So one day they had a party and I was invited, so I stopped by and finally asked, "Where did Ant Eater get that nick name". With out a pause Ant Eaters brother said "Oh because he slept with our Aunt, and apparently he was good with his tongue. So we call him Aunt Eater!"
"Come forth and I shall grant you eternal life", said God unto John. But John came in fifth and won a toaster.
I'm a Muslim parent with an honor roll student! My kid is the bomb
Why did the cockroach break up with his mosquito girlfriend? He saw her sucking someone else.
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? 'Cause girl you hot as fuck. 
It's a Priests first day at a new church... and after Mass he sits down in the confession booth. He's nervous because this is his first time in confessional after seminary school and he isn't sure if he'll remember what to do.

Someone walks in and sits down, and starts to confess. "Forgive me Father for I have sinned, it's been 2 weeks since my last confession."

Father thinks for a second, and says, "Alright my son, you get 10 Hail Marys and you shall be forgiven"

Second person comes in, sits down and starts to confess. "Forgive me Father for I have sinned. I slept with a woman who was not my wife."

Father panics a little, settles down and starts to think. "Ah, yes! I give you 20 Our Fathers and you shall be forgiven my son."

A third person comes in and sits down. "Forgive me father, but last night I got a blowjob." 

"Oh, no!" he though, "what do I do!"

So Father quickly peeks outside and grabs an Alter Boy and says, "hey what do you get for a blowjob??"

And the Alter Boy says, "well the old Priest used to give me a snickers"










Son asks for money A young jewish son asks his dad for $5 dollars.

The dad responds shocked, "$4 dollars? What do you need $3 dollars for?"
Donald Trump's cabinet is so dumb  that I can get a better one at IKEA.
Could you imagine if someone pulled off Trump's hair piece? There would be hell toupee.
Words can't express how beautiful you are. But numbers can. 

4/10
What's a Germans least favourite drink? Juice
There was a guy who was having chronic trouble getting an erection. After weeks of frustration, he finally decides he is going to go see a doctor. The doctor gives him a thorough examination and eventually makes the diagnosis. 

"Well, there's good news and there's bad news," she says.

"The bad news is that the muscles around your penis are deteriorating, and there is no cure."

The guy, on the verge of panic, finally regains his composure. "So what's the good news?" he asks.

The doctor says, "There is an experimental treatment available, but there are no guarantees. It involves transplanting the muscles from a  baby elephant's trunk into your penis. Would you like to try it?"

The guy thinks about it and finally says, "Well, the thought of going through life without being able to have sex is just too much for me. What have I got to lose? Let's do it." So the doctor performs the operation.

A few weeks later, the guy takes his girlfriend out to a nice restaurant to celebrate his new equipment. While sitting at the table, he feels a stirring between his legs; it gets progressively worse until it reaches a point of being painful.

Seeking relief, he reaches down and unzips his fly to relieve some of the pressure.  

Suddenly, his penis leaps free from his pants, slides over the tabletop and grabs a dinner roll, then returns to his pants again.

"Wow!" says his girlfriend stunned, "That was impressive! Can you do it again?"

Eyes watering and face flushed, he says, "Probably... but I don't know if I can fit another dinner roll up my ass!"
Two hunters Two hunters are walking through the woods and having a great time. When all of the sudden one falls to the ground, eyes roll back in their head, and it not breathing. 

So the other friend calls 911, "Help my friend just died and I do not know what to do!?"

The 911 operator says, "Well are you sure he is dead? Can you make sure he is dead?"

The operator hears the phone being placed on the ground, and a shot go off. The operator hears the phone being picked back up and the hunter says "Well now what!?"
Mr and Mrs Grape had it all, almost... Mr and Mrs Grape had it all, almost. They had a great place on the vine, friends and enough Grape money in their savings. The only thing they wanted was a little grape to call their own. They tried and tried for weeks, making intimate grape love everynight with no success. One night they decided to take a break and go visit the circus that just pulled into the vineyard.  
  
The circus was amazing and they enjoyed a peaceful night not worrying about babies, as they were leaving they noticed a small tent off to the side and they entered it. An old wrinkly prune sat in front of a table and spoke to them "I know what you seek, a child to call your own, I can help you but it comes at a price." "Anything" Mrs Grape replied "we have money, antiques, anything!" "No, no, no, drink this potion, in 6 nights you will give birth. He will not be handsome, he will not be timid, if you can not love him, you will return to us and he will live here in the circus, yes?" The prune asked as she handed a small bottle to Mrs Grape. Knowing she would love him no matter what he was like, Mrs Grape drank the potion.  
 
True to the prunes word Mrs Grape fell pregnant, six nights later she gave birth, he was small, very dry, brown and shrivelled. Mr & Mrs Grape tried to care for the little boy, they nurtured him, stayed awake with him, gave him everything they had but he never stopped crying and once he could move he never stopped trying to destroy their house. After several weeks they were exhausted. The little one never grew, he stayed dry, small and wrinkly, the stress was becoming too much.  
  
One day Mr Grape returned from work with a small cage, he convinced Mrs Grape they needed a nights sleep and to decide in the morning if they would return the child to the circus. They locked him in the cage and moved him to the furthest part of the vineyard. For the first time in weeks they held each other and slept. In the morning with a fresh outlook they knew something was not right with their child, they walked hand in hand to the cage, ready to take him to the Prune.  
  
Mr Grape spoke sadly "I'm sorry buddy, we've tried, we are exhausted and I don't even think you understand us? We've given it our all but we are taking you to live with the circus. You're just not the child we planned on *raisin*.
Why isn't Barbie pregnant? Because Ken came in a different box
Jim apple Had a very rough time introducing himself in France
A bodybuilder told me he hates protein. No whey!
You know what pisses me off most about Reddit? [deleted]
My pet rock died 1 upvote = 1 pray
What is Sean Spicer's favorite genre of music? Alternative Rock
Can I make a wish? Two Men were out fishing when one decides to have a smoke He asks the other guy if he has a lighter He replies "Yes I do!" and hands the other a 10 inch long BIC lighter Surprised the guy asks "Where did you get this?" The guy replies "Oh I have a personal genie." The first man asks "Can I make a wish? " Sure says the other man "Just make sure that you speak clearly cause he is a little hard at hearing" "Ok I will" says the other as he rubs the lamp a genie appears and asks the man what he wants The man says " I want a Million Bucks " The genie says OK and goes back to his bottle and 10 seconds later a million ducks fly over head And the guy says to the other " Your genie realy sucks at hearing doesnt he?" The other man replies "I know, do you really think I asked for a 10 inch BIC" 





Trust not the Alien... It almost killed Sigourney Weaver.
If Christians have the Daily Bread, what do Buddhists have? The Daily Lama
Get Stoned Before an Auction Even if you don't win anything, you'll still be the highest bidder!
A guy gets arrested for taking a dump. -Knock knock

-Who's there?

-Police.

-Can you wait a little? I'm taking a dump right now.

-We know, this phone booth is transparent. 
How do you know if your roommate is gay? His dick tastes like shit.
Why couldn't Beethoven find his teacher? Because he was Haydn
My wife's an Archaeologist because... She keeps on digging up the past!
A rabbi and a priest A rabbi Asked a priest:

>Could you ever be promoted in your church?

The priest answered,

>Well, I could become a bishop

The Rabbi asked,

>And then?

The preist said, 

>Well, I suppose I could even be an archbishop

The rabbi said,

>And if you were to be promoted again?

The priest answered,

>Well, then I would be a cardinal

The rabbi inquired once again, to which the priest answered,

>I could become the Pope

The rabbi asked,

>And then?

The priest threw up his hands and said,

>what more could I become?
God himself?!

The rabbi calmly replied,

>One of our boys made it.
What did I say to -1? Look Ma! Not real.
I invented the perfect beach accessory for men! A clip-on-tip that attaches to the inside of your suit and peeks out just below the bottom of a guy's swim trunks.

We're calling it the Billadong.
A nice, calm and respectable lady went into..... A nice, calm and respectable lady went into the pharmacy, right up to the pharmacist, looked straight into his eyes, and said, "I would like to buy some cyanide."
The pharmacist asked, "Why in the world do you need cyanide?"
The lady replied, "I need it to poison my husband."
The pharmacists eyes got big and he exclaimed, "Lord have mercy! I can't give you cyanide to kill your husband! That's against the law! I'll lose my license! They'll throw both of us in jail! All kinds of bad things will happen. Absolutely not! You CANNOT have any cyanide!"
The lady reached into her purse and pulled out a picture of her husband in bed with the pharmacist's wife. 
The pharmacist looked at the picture and replied, "Well now. That's different. You didn't tell me you had a prescription."
What does a Frenchman say who lost his dinner whilst trying to find some more? Where did you come from?

Where did you go?

Where did you come from escargot?
What the difference between a gay guy and a refrigerator. When you put meat in the refrigerator it doesn't get aids
So i read this story about a woman who got electrocuted when she dropped her vibrator in the bath It was a total buzzkill
Scottish bloke goes on a skiing holiday to Canada This Scottish bloke goes on a skiing holiday to Canada. After a hard day on the slopes he retires to a bar at the bottom of the mountain. After about five or six whiskeys, he looks up and notices a stuffed animal with antlers on the wall. He asks the barman, "What the fuck is that?".
The barman says, "It's a Moose." The Scottish chap says, "Fuck me! How big are the cats?"
A priest.... A priest, an Irishman, a horse, a gorilla, a twelve inch pianist and an infinite number of mathematicians walk into a bar.

The bartender says "Is this some kind of a joke?"
Why did the cockroach break up with his centipede girlfriend? Each time he spreads a couple of her legs she says: It's not here!
Steve and his buddies were hanging out and..... Steve and his buddies were hanging out and planning an upcoming fishing trip. 
Unfortunately, he had to tell them that he couldn't go this time because his wife wouldn't let him. 
After a lot of teasing and name calling, Steve headed home frustrated.

The following week when Steve's buddies arrived at the lake to set up camp, they were shocked to see Steve. 
He was already sitting at the campground with a cold beer, swag rolled out, 
fishing rod in hand, and a camp fire glowing.
"How did you talk your missus into letting you go Steve?"
"I didn't have to," Steve replied.
"Yesterday, when I left work, I went home and slumped down in my chair with a beer to drown my 
sorrows because I couldn't go fishing. Then the ol' lady Snuck up behind me and covered my eyes and said, 
'Surprise'. When I peeled her hands back, she was standing there in a beautiful see through negligee and 
she said, 'Carry me into the bedroom, tie me to the bed and you can do whatever you want,' So, Here I am!"
What happens if you don't pay your exorcist? You get repossessed. 
What is Bane's favorite movie? Broke-back Mountain
What do you call a person who is not a nihilist? A De-nihilist.
What happens when you take a joke too far? The 45th President of the United States. 
My doctor told me I was eating too much meat So I decided to quit cold turkey
In Soviet Russia, a Judge bursts into his chambers laughing *"I've just heard the funniest joke about Stalin... ever!"*

*"Well, go ahead and tell us."*, the other Judges ask.

*"I can't. I just gave someone a life sentence for it."*
Ann and Joe are having an argument "You are like Satan!" screamed Joe.  

"Their Mom says, "Shh, Joe thats offending."  Once Ann left, she said, "Offending to Satan!"
A rabbit is walking on the railways He is singing: My life is amazing, dumdumdum, my life is long, dum dumdum, dumdumdum dumdumdum dumdumdum
What do you do with dead scientists? Barium
Why didn't the pony say anything? 
Because he was a little hoarse...
Spilt milk I hate how every time I come home and go to the kitchen my flat mate has spilled milk everywhere. How dairy 
What did the over-sized transgender postcard say to the UPS driver? What don't you understand? I told you, I don't fit in a male box!
What do you call a gay dinosaur? A megasoreass.
Reading the news today. Man: A policeman accidentally inserted his truncheon in someone's umm, ahh, mm.

Other Man: Rectum?

Man: Damn near killed 'em

There are only two people I know who can kill 70+ people in 2 hours. John wick... and John Wick 2
Why do you wrap hamsters in duct tape? So they don't blow up when you fuck 'em.
A nun is walking down the street... A nun is walking down the street. As she passes a dark alley a man grabs her, pulls her into the alley, rips off her clothes, and ravages her in the most obscene manner possible.

As the man is zipping up the nun wails, "Oh No! How am I going to tell Mother Superior I have been sexually violated twice!"

The man says, "What do you mean? I only did it once."

The nun leans back and says, "Yeah, but you're going to do it again, aren't you?"
How do you make an idiot wonder? [deleted]
There was a prison break and I saw a midget climb up the fence. As he jumped down he sneered at me and I thought, well that’s a little condescending.
What do you call a situation where a train wreck is happening right in front of your eyes and you can't do anything about it? Donald Trump
I identify as all real numbers. Call me by my new pronoun:

xeR
Dorothy: Toto, we're not in Kansas anymore Toto: I know, I miss the rains down in africa
What did the caveman say when he stumbled upon a pooping dinosaur? "That's pooposterous!"
What is The ISIS Cafeteria called? Allahu Snakbar.
A Yugoslavian jew moves to israel After ww2 most of the (still alive) yugoslavian jews moved to Israel.

Shlomo shekelowitz decides to stay in yugoslavia just to test the new socialist regime.

After a year he moves to israel.

One of his old friends sees him and asks

SCHLOMO! Long time we did not see each other ! How is it in Yugoslavia ?

Schlomo responds : "I couldn't complain".

His friend responds : "Why did you move here then ?"

"I couldn't complain", Schlomo repeats
I told my dad to embrace his mistakes. He cried. Then he hugged my sister and me.
My wife got diagnosed with Alzeihmers and Parkinsons last week. I've been getting 8 wanks a day.
What did the farmer say after he lost his tractor? Where is my tractor?

(I am so sorry).
A lady goes into a pharmacy and asks for cyanide... A nice, calm and respectable lady went into the pharmacy, right up to the pharmacist, looked straight into his eyes, and said, "I would like to buy some cyanide." The pharmacist asked, "Why in the world do you need cyanide?" The lady replied, "I need it to poison my husband." The pharmacists eyes got big and he exclaimed, "Lord have mercy! I can't give you cyanide to kill your husband! That's against the law! I'll lose my license! They'll throw both of us in jail! All kinds of bad things will happen. Absolutely not! You CANNOT have any cyanide!" The lady reached into her purse and pulled out a picture of her husband in bed with the pharmacist's wife. The pharmacist looked at the picture and replied, "Well now. That's different. You didn't tell me you had a prescription."
How does Bob Ross exorcise his paint brush? He beats the devil out of it.
Me and my friends had an argument.... [NSFW] Me and my friends had an argument about what was more fucked up,  one of my friends said necrophilia,  the other said bestiality. I would've said both... But I didn't want to beat a dead horse. 
A pun contest... A man's newsletter tells him about a pun contest they are holding. The person who submits the best pun will win $10000. The man thinks,
*I could really use that money!*
So he decides he will submit some puns. In the hopes of winning the $10000, he submits 10 puns in one letter. He hoped and prayed that at least one pun would win it for him.

But no pun in ten did.
People are saying that 3.5 years to build the wall is too long, but I'm not worried Government-funded construction projects almost never run over their time
What's the difference between a BMW and a cactus? George Zimmerman has never shot a cactus.  
What did the chimpanzee say to the human? No homo.
Who do you call when you get robbed in Mexico? 9-Juan-Juan
Three kids walk into a Pole He was very fat.
Why do you always put your left shoe on last? Because when you put one shoe on, the other one is left.
What did the Alabaman wife say to her husband when she found out he was cheating? Oh, brother. 
Two thieves break into a man's house... The man wakes up in the middle of a night and runs down stairs but the thieves escape over the fence so he calls the police. The police get to his house and ask what happened; the mans says: "Well the robbers took off with my personal computer and nothing else before I scared them away", the police officer says "Did you get a look at them? Can you give us a description?" the man says "Well it was dark and I was only half-awake... but if I had to guess, I'd say they looked looked like the kind of people that would download child porn".
Whats the difference between Jared Fogel and a pixie stick? it's OK for a kid to have a pixie stick in their mouth.
Two prostitutes are hanging out on a corner in the 70's when one asks the other, "Hey, have you ever been picked up by the fuzz?" The other says "No, but I've been swung around by the tits."
What does uranium have in common with a mental ward patient? They're both unstable.
What's the worst part about a blizzard in a leper colony? Stepping outside in the morning to find a foot on the roof of your car
Seagull with diarrheia Seagull With Diarrhea told another that it barely Made It To Crowded Beach In Time.
So I asked a sheep how it is to be a sheep. "Meh..."
So I know the Mexicans probably think the wall will be too expensive... But they'll get over it.
A mother and her child were hugging ... "Mommy," says the child, "am I adopted?"

"No, sweetie," replied the mother. "We haven't managed to find someone who will take you."
A large woman, wearing a sleeveless sundress walked into a bar in Dublin. She raised her right arm, revealing a huge, hairy armpit and, as she pointed to all the people sitting at the bar she asked, "What man here will buy a lady a drink?"

The bar went silent as patrons tried to ignore her. But down at the end of the bar, an owly-eyed drunk slammed his hand down on the counter and bellowed, "Give the ballerina a drink!"

The bartender poured the drink and the woman chugged it down.

She turned to the patrons and again pointed around at all of them, revealing the same hairy armpit, and asked, "What man here will buy a lady a drink?"

Once again, the same little drunk slapped his money down on the bar and said, "Give the ballerina another drink!"

The bartender approached the little drunk and said, "Tell me, Paddy, it's your business if you want to buy the lady a drink, but why do you keep calling her the ballerina?"

The drunk replied, "Any woman who can lift her leg that high has got to be a ballerina!"
Three men are walking along, two of them walk into a bar... The third one ducks. 

I'm sorry. I'm sure many have heard it before. But I haven't seen it here.
A mushroom walks into a bar.... Bartender says "sorry sir we don't serve your kind" mushroom says "why.... I'm a fungi"
Donald Trump was once asked if he could quote any Bible verses. "Give a man a fish and he will eat for a day. Deport him and you will never have to feed him again."

Donald 20:17
What do you get when you cross an elephant and a rhino. Fuck if I know
BREAKING: White House staffer leaks that the President was surprised to learn that Checks and Balances didn't refer just to... bank accounts
What’s 18 inches long and dangles in front of an asshole? Donald Trump’s tie.
A guy gets a job as a lumberjack He's in a logging camp in the middle of nowhere and everything is going great. After a couple of weeks he's talking to his foreman when he says, "I notice there's no women around for miles, what do you guys do to satisfy your needs?" The foreman hands him a map and tells him to follow this to the biggest tree in the Forrest, there is a hole in the side of it. Just stick your dick in there and you will feel better. The new lumberjack was put off by this idea and decided to pass. But, after a few more weeks he was getting antsy and decided to make the hike to the tree. When he gets there he sticks his dick in and is amazed, it feels just like fucking a woman. He was instantly hooked. He started visiting the tree every night, sometimes more then once and would just go to town fucking the shit out of that tree. One night on one of his trips he sticks his dick in and nothing happens, it feels like just sticking his dick in a wood hole. He goes back to foreman and tells him he thinks the tree is broken. The foreman says, "that's strange" he pulls a clipboard off the wall and says, "oh, no its your turn to be inside the hollow tree."
How does Moses make his coffee? *hebrews* it!
Why did the necrophiliac get a divorce? The rotten bitch split on him!
Dogs don't love you... They're just glad they don’t live in China.
18:- can I buy a bottle of wine? Government :- No, that's illegal and irresponsible. 

18:- Can I go $40,000 into debt for education??

Government :- we encourage it.
Why do Nazis like dentists? Because they prefer whites
What does the Buddhist order from the hot dog stand? Make me one with everything :)
My dad always lived by the motto "Work hard, play hard." Mom made him seek help for his Viagra addiction.
Jesus is setting up for supper and he calls Judas over to help. "Judas, please set the table. " Judas complies and sets the table. "Judas, put the food on the table." Judas places the food on the table.  "Judas, please call everyone to the table. " Again, he does as he is told and gathers everyone. 

As they are enjoying the feast Jesus planned and had Judas serve, Jesus gets really serious and says," This will be my last supper with you." He pauses and continues, " One of you will betray me." 
At which point Judas throws his hands up in a huff," Why do I have to do everything around here?!"

How is Mexico going to be able to pay for the wall? It's expensive, but I'm sure they'll get over it. 
What's the difference between Donald Trump and 5 year old? Honestly, somebody tell me because I have no fucking clue.
What do new iPhones and Donald Trump have in common? Both cost more than they're worth and create the illusion of superiority without ever delivering.
What's red and bad for your teeth? A brick
What did the muslim in America say ? [removed]
What did the D.J. say to the Vegetable Farmer? Lettuce turnip the beet.
You know what they say about jokes The cheesier the grater!
Adultery Code There was this old priest who got sick of all the people in his parish who kept confessing to adultery. One Sunday, in the pulpit, he said, "If I hear one more person confess to adultery, I'll quit!" Well, everyone liked him, so they came up with a code word. Someone who had committed adultery would say they had "fallen". 

This seemed to satisfy the old priest and things went well, until the priest died at a ripe old age. About a week after the new priest arrived, he visited the Mayor of the town and seemed very concerned. 

The priest said, "You have to do something about the sidewalks in town. When people come into the confessional, they keep talking about having fallen." 

The Mayor started to laugh, realizing that no-one had told the new priest about the code word. 

Before the mayor could explain, the priest shook an accusing finger at the mayor and said, "I don't know what you're laughing about. Your wife fell three times this week."
My boss told me, "You are the worst train driver ever. How many have you derailed this year?" I replied, "I don't know; it's hard to keep track".
Did you hear about the musician who named his daughter Sharp? He didn't have the heart to tell her she was accidental.
What do you get when you cross a chicken with a centipede? Extra drumsticks!
The executive is overworked and decide to take some time off and visit his farmer cousins... The executive is overworked getting stressed and decide to take some time off from work and visit his cousins who live in a farm in the country side.
He calls his cousin who is more than happy to have him over since they haven't seen each other in years.
When the executive gets there he notices that not much has changed since the last time he was there, a long time ago. He is filled with nostalgia and starts feeling better already.
They have coffee and chat for a little bit and the executive says he wants to do some farm manual labor to take his head off work and forget about the city life for a while.
The farmer says there is plenty of work to do around the farm and the executive can help him. So the farmer tells him to wake up early the next day and meet him at the stable.
When the executive gets to the stable the next day the farmer shows him piles of bags and say:
- This is all the horse manure we collected for the past 3 months. Your job will will be to spread it over that empty field to fertilize the soil for the next season.
Two hours later the executive is done and goes to ask his cousin what else he can do.
The farmer is surprised. "This usually takes us a whole day! I only planned work for you for tomorrow".
So the farmer inspects the field and is astonished the executive did such a good job in so little time. So he tells him to take the rest of the day off and meet him at he chicken coop the next morning.
The next morning the farmer says: "We got a big chicken order from one of our clients and we have to deliver it ready for processing. Your job will be to cut the chickens head off so we can send them out. Again, two hours later the executive is done and goes to ask his cousin what else he can do. The farmer is surprised now even more. He didn't think his city cousin could manage farm jobs so well.
"This usually takes us two days, this is impressive! Meet me at the orange plantation tomorrow morning."
The next morning the farmer says: "The orange harvesting wasn't very good this year. We only got this 10 boxes of oranges. Your job will be to separate them in 3 piles, big oranges, medium oranges and small oranges. If anyone is bad just discard it."
To the farmers surprise, it's the end of the day and his executive cousin is still not back for dinner, so he goes to check on him. When he gets there is sees his cousin working out still on the first box, comparing sizes on two oranges, then picking a third one and changing it's original pile... The farmer is puzzled, screeching his head. "what's the matter? I thought you would finish this in no time"
The executive looks at him and says: "I'm an executive. We are really good at spreading shit and cutting heads. But we really struggle when it comes to making decisions"
Why did no one go to work in Mongolian Persia? Because they were always Ilkhanate
What's a pirate's favorite letter? It's the C matey!!!!!

Idk I'm high
Three men walks into a bar. The fourth man ducks.
Want to know how to keep your guitar sounding good? Stay tuned.
Please dont tell jokes about domestic abuse... They hit too close to home
A man goes to a doctor. Doctor : I don't know how to tell you this, but you have got to stop masturbating.

Patient : But why?

Doctor : So that I can fucking examine you.
What's super marios favorite type of fabric? Denim denim denim.
Woman are turning into good drivers ...so if ur a good driver watch out for women turning!
Surround yourself with people who have issues.

People with issues always have alcohol. 

I went to the Zoo the other day and there was a loaf of Hovis in the Lion enclosure - so I went up to the zookeeper and said "What's that doing in there?"

and he said "That? That's bread in captivity"
Can Napoleon return to his place of birth? Of Corsican.
Did you know that 80% of Korean businessmen have caddaracts? The other 20% drive Mercedes
A blind man walks into a bar... And a table...and a chair...and the waiter...
Did you know Princess Diana was on the radio the night she died? She was on the radio, and the dashboard, and the hood.
Make the horse laugh A man walks into a bar and sees a jar full of money next to a horse stall

The man goes over to the bartender and asks what the set up is for.

"You pay five bucks to go into the stall where the horse is, and if you can make the horse laugh, you win all the money in the jar.

"Easy" the man says. He puts five dollars in the jar, walks up to the horse, whispers in his ear, and the horse starts cracking up. The man takes the money and leaves.

A week later, the man goes back to the bar, where they have the same set up.

"Same bet?" The man asks.

"No, this time you have to make the horse cry"

"Even easier" the man says. So he puts five bucks in the jar, walks up to the horse, and the horse starts crying.

The man is about to take the money and run, but the bartender stops him.

"OK, first, how'd you get the horse to laugh?"

And the man says "I told him I had a bigger dick than he did."

"And how'd you get the horse to cry?" The bartender asks.

"I showed him." 
I love to Poop.
Did you hear about the Bowling Green Massacre? No?   
Neither did the victims. 
3 nuns are sitting on a bench. A man in a trench coat walks by and flashes them. 2 of the nuns had a stroke. The third couldn't reach. 
Every year, millions of people get sick from eating tainted beef. Who the hell is putting their taint on the beef? 
Why did the cowboy orphan cat limp into the bar? He was looking for the man who shot his paw.
I call my wife Bambi She thinks it's because she's cute with big brown eyes. But it's really because I want someone to shoot her mother with a hunting rifle.

**Edit:** Some people have accused me of "being a plagiarist" and "stealing other's jokes"... Their words, not mine...

*Pause for comedic value*

But seriously, this **is** a version of an Ashlee Barnhill joke. Sorry for the bamboozle fellow redditors.
A Grizzly has attacked a school! Four are dead! Fortunately, the rest of the salmon are OK and are peacefully continuing upstream.
2018 kids won't get this Club penguin 
A man attempts a bar hop... ...and squashes his nuts
What did Batman say to Robin before they got in the batmobile? Get in the batmobile.
What does a sneezing nut sound like? *Ca-shew.*
2017 First UFO lands Alien: "Take me to your leader."

*Alien is brought to Pres. Trump.

Alien: "Good one! Seriously though. This is important."
A nazi spy goes to a bar with a friend "Bartender, I vant two martinis, please."
"Dry?"
"Zwei, du amerikanisches Schwein!"
A plane crashed on the border of two countries, and everyone dies except the pilot. Where you do you bury the survivors? Six feet under a cesspit, till you can no longer hear his screams.
Hey girl, are you today's date? Because you're 2/10. 
Iron Man at a dance club Tony Stark is in an electronic dance club, he's very upset that the D.J is playing subpar music and that the bar is closed. All of this makes Iron Man- Stark raving mad.
I met two hipsters today Turns out, the correct term is conjoined twins.
I can't stop shitting out feathers. I think I've got Irritable owl syndrome. 
Since Valentine's is approaching, my friend posted "I love my girlfriend <3" I knew he liked them young but that is fucking ridiculous.
Did you hear about the constipated mathematician? He worked it out with a pencil. 
I bought a treadmill the other day... It's really giving me a run for my money.
I was really unsuccessful and unpopular until I stood on a globe covered in super glue. Now I have the world at my feet.
What do you call Steve Bannon in a rubber room? Home.
How do you get a jewish girls number? You roll up her sleeve.
What do people smoke in concentration camps? MariJEWana
What is the most common job among spiders? Web designer.
Loyalty is very important for my wife... My girlfriend doesn't care. 

Funny how different sisters can be.
A man walks into a bar (semi-original) A man walks into a bar and sees a bunch of old men sitting around talking and drinking.  He gets up to the bar, and orders himself a drink, and casually listens into the conversations.

"Yes yes, but number 42."  

"Number 42?  Two fifty eight."  

"Are you kidding me?  Thirty three my friend.  Thirty three."

The man looks at the bartender and asks, "Hey what's with the numbers?"

"Oh they're just talking politics.  Same group, day in and day out."

"But what's with the numbers?"

"Well, they got tired of re-hashing the same old arguments over and over.  So they just gave them a number."

A man in back shouts, "Fifty two, as always."

Bartender says, "See, fifty two means he's accusing the other guy of making an appeal to stone, which is a logical fallacy in which a statement is automatically dismissed as ridiculous without taking the evidence into consideration."

"Wow, that's amazing."

"Not really.  I've been listening to them for years.  Most of them don't even know what they're talking about.  I think you could just throw out random numbers and none of them would know it."

Just then an elderly gentleman sits next to him.  The guy decides to give it a try, so he looks over and asks, "So my friend.  Twenty eight."

He replies, "Twenty eight?  Bah!  A hundred and thirteen."

"Fifty-two."

"Fifty-two?" The man raises his voice a little.  "Seventy three!"

Not knowing what to say next, the man just spouts off random numbers.  "Eight nine"

"Eight"

"Ninety six."

"A hundred and four!"

The exchange continues back and forth.  Thirty-two.  Fifty Six.  Seventy nine.  One thirty three.  

The old man stops and with a huge grin, he says "Ah ... very clever.  Very clever.  One thirty three.  But Sixteen.  You never considered sixteen. Checkmate."

The guy, still clueless about what they just argued about, looks to the bartender, holds up his finger to motion for another drink and says, "One."

At that moment, the bar goes silent.  They all look to the man.  The elderly gentleman is furious.  Enraged.  He stands up, and with as strong a punch any octogenarian can muster, he hits the guy as hard as he can, and storms out.  

Stunned, the guy recomposes himself.  The bar goes back to their conversations, and he asks the bartender, "What the hell just happened?"

"That was Saul Greenberg, and you just said he's no better than Hitler."
What do you get when there is a death at a funeral? A rehearsal.
Hermaphrodite... A woman gives birth to a baby. Shortly afterward, the doctor comes into the room looking grim faced. The woman sees this and panics.

 "Doctor, is my baby ok?"

 "Yes", the doctor replies. "But, Mrs. Johnson, I must tell you that your baby was born an hermaphrodite."

 "A... hermaphro-whaaat???"

 "An hermaphrodite, Mrs. Johnson. Essentially, your baby was born with the same body parts pertaining to both a male AND a female."

 The woman thinks about this.

 "So... let me get this straight, doctor. You're telling me that my baby was born with both a penis AND a brain???"
A New Yorker went for a checkup.. Doctor: We're sorry, you have Hepatitis B.

New Yorker: Damn B, what kind of hepatitis?﻿
I came up with a 'Knock Knock' joke "Knock Knock"
"Who's there?"
"I'll ask"
"I'll ask who?"
"Al- ask- a ... It's so cold!"
I applied for a job at a blacksmiths He asked if ive ever shoed a horse before. 

I said no but i once told a donkey to fuck off
Two tattooed people ride in a car, who is driving? The police
What would Freud say comes between fear and sex? Funf.
What do you call a pessimistic Mexican doing math? Negative Juan.
Surprise bj I woke up to a surprise blowjob today. 
I should really start sleeping with my mouth closed
The captain of the Titantic was a vegetarian, his last words were... "Iceberg lettuce leaf"
What do you call a cuddle with only one person? A cddle, because u weren't there
Rick Astley will let you borrow any movie from his collection except for one. He's never gonna give you Up.
What does a rapper say after he's done recording? It's a rap 

The doctor told me to drink a lot of clear liquid So I picked up some vodka and gin on the way home.
Mammoth walks down the street. All of a sudden a dozen of elephants get out of the corner, see Mammoth, come by and beat the shit out of him.

After they left Mammoth stands up, spits broken tusks and says: "Fucking skinheads!"
An infinite number of mathematicians walk into a bar The first orders a pint.  The second orders half a pint.  The third orders a quarter pint.  The barman says "Fuck you guys" and pours two pints.
A Nazi walks into a Bar... ... Mitzvah
Why did the scarecrow win an award? Because he was outstanding in his field
What has four wheels and flies? A garbage truck.
What kind of boxer spits on their opponents face? A beat boxer 
What's the difference between Jesus and a picture of Jesus? It only takes one nail to hang a picture.
What do you call a clown in prison? A sillycon
What did the leper say to the prostitute? Keep the tip.
Angela Merkel visits Greece Angela Merkel visits Greece. On her way through customs she gets stopped by an officer

'Nationality?' He asks

'German' she replies

'Occupation?' 

'No, just visiting'
Some guy assaulted me last night with a bat ... I was really impressed with how well he had trained it. 
An exhibitionist cross path with a 6 yo girl on her way to school. He asks the little girl "Hey, honey, do you know what a phallus is ?"

"No mister, I've never heard of it"

He then gets his raincoat wide open, revealing the erected object and starting to laugh frantically "It's this ! hahahahaha"

To which the child answers "Oh I see, it's like a dick, but smaller."
As the animals left the ark, Noah told them to go forth and multiply. After some while, Noah happened upon two snakes sunning themselves. "Why aren't you multiplying?" Noah asked. The snakes replied, "We can't, we're adders."

So Noah and his sons went into the nearby forest and felled some trees. They made a platform of logs onto which they placed the snakes. You see, even adders can multiply on a log table.
Can he simplify this trigonometric equation? Cos he can't! Get it? It's like cosecant. Hahahaha

I made this joke in algebra 2 in high school and the class laughed for like 10 minutes straight. I believe it was the best pun of my entire life. 2 years later when I was a senior people still brought up the joke when these trigonometric identities came up. 


German girl number One day I asked a sex German girl for her number and she said "SEX SEX SEX. DRY SEX SWINE!"

I cowered away in fear

Then her friend came up to me and said "She means '666-3629"
Drunk in taxi A drunk gets into the back of a cab and the driver starts heading down the street. The drunk asks the cabbie, "hey Mac- do you have room up front for a six pack of beer and a pepperoni pizza?" The driver says "sure." The drunk goes "BLLLECCCCHHHHH." 

(It works much better verbally.)
What do they call the Hunger Games in France? Battle Royale with Cheese.
What do you call a biker gang of bisexual Norse monarchs? The Bikings.
When a woman gets a vibrator, It's seen as a bit of naughty fun. 
But when a guy orders a 240 volt fuckmaster pro 5000 blow up latex doll, with a 6 speed pulsating pussy, elasticized anus with non-drip semen collection tray, together with optional built in realistic orgasm scream surround sound system. He's called a pervert!
Did you hear about the guy who proposed to marry his car? He wanted a more engaging driver experience.
What do you get when you fuse Arab and Indian food? Explosive Diarrhea
My maths teacher just told us a mean joke... I thought he was a coMedian.
Funny that when a guy sleeps with tons of girls, he's a stud.. But when a girl sleeps with tons of guys, somehow I’m not one of them.

I can't remember the translation of German "wichtig." I have a feeling it's important, though. 
Steve Bannon so drunk... his liver spots got liver spots. 
There was once an emotionally unstable suicide bomber he fell to pieces. 
What do the guys at /incels use for birth control? Their personalities.  One hundred percent effective.
Stores in Seattle now accept credit cards in canabis stores It's been a week for green cards in Washington
My wife started with this weight loss program... A few months into the program she says to me "It's been a couple of months and I still look fat. Can you give me a compliment?"

I couldn't really think of anything because she hates when I compliment her on her personality so I said "You have perfect eyesight dear."
The Toothpaste Salesman So a toothpaste company offered a promotion to the salesman who could sell the most toothpaste in one week. 

After one week they all came back and the boss asked how they did. 

The first said he sold 100 by going door to door and telling people about the toothpaste, the boss says wow that's good. 

The second said he sold 1000 by standing in front of grocery stories and tell people how important toothpaste is, and the boss says wow that's amazing.  

The third said I sold 50,000 and the boss asked how that is possible, the salesman then says he went to the local [insert local professional sports arena] NFL game and set up a sign that says FREE CHIPS AND DIP, and when the people tasted the dip they said "wow that dip taste like shit" and the salesman responded by saying "it is, would you like to buy a toothbrush?" 
An American walks into a cheesemaker's shop in Italy. The cheesemaker greets him with an enthusiastic smile, "*Ciao!* How-a may I help-a you-a?"

The American asks, "Do you have any Gouda cheese?"

The cheesemaker scowls and turns red in the face, then gesticulates around the room and yells, "It's-a all-a good-a cheese!!"
I wonder if.. What if the ocean is salty because the land never waves back?
My girlfriend was giving me my first pedicure I asked her if the tool she was using to rub my feet was called a pedofile. 
Jesus fed 2000 Jews fish and bread Hitler made 5 million Jews toast 
If waitresses with big boobs work at Hooters, then where do 1 legged waitresses work? IHOP 



Gives tipping your waitress new meaning
After yoga class, I followed my instructor home and broke into her bedroom window. She screamed and told me I need to leave. I told her "Nah, I'ma stay".
I got jailed when I performed a magic trick. Apparently, when I make the kids disappear, I also have to make them reappear.
A horse walks into a bar The bartender says "What do you want?"
The horse unable to understand English shits itself and runs out.
The past, present and future walked into a bar. And it was tense.
What's the difference between a feminist and a suicide vest? People care if the vest gets triggered.
A guy asks a girl to prom... She says yes,
In preparation, the guy goes to rent a nice suit. He waits in line for a very long time but eventually he gets it.
He decides he wants to be a little fancy and so he goes to rent a limo. There's a large line at the dealer. He waits in line for a very long time but eventually he rents the limo.
On the day of the prom, he gets in the limo and begins to drive to the house of his date. There's a lot of traffic so he waits in line for a very long time but eventually he gets there.
He picks up his date and gets to prom without a problem. They dance, have fun etc. 
Eventually the girl gets thirsty and she asks the guy to go get some drinks.
He walks to the punch table and there's no punch line.
The Duel (Extremely Long) During the Yongle Emperor's reign in the Ming Dynasty, there was an imperial proclamation posted on the Quintuple Pailou of Front-Gate Street in Beijing. This proclamation gripped the attention of the entire city. The people of the three front gates gathered up like a storm. Monks, Taoists, Muslims, Confuscianists, Scholars of a hundred schools, farmers, artisans, merchants, and all the other professions in the world, along with officials, eunuchs, bowmen, arrowfolk, cart-pushers, pole carriers, coal sellers, charcoal sellers, needle and thread sellers, pie and noodle sellers, pot-fixers and garlic sellers, pancake and doughnut sellers, tea and egg sellers.... all these people! They don't know what happened with the country, and why there was a proclamation, so they gathered up to get a look.

At this time, from the north there came a dude, whose last name is Sun and first name is Delong and a butcher in the East Quaduple Pailou Butcher's Street, and knows how to catch and butcher pigs. He originally came from Dengzhou, Shandong, and is around 40 years old. He likes to drink. Today he just came from the butchery, and held his pig hook in his armpit, which is a white waxed pole as thick as a walnut, a meter and half in length, and two bronze hooks at the tip. If the pig runs away, he can hook it back with one pull. He held his purse in one hand and his ledger in his other armpit. He had a rope for a belt and pewter liquor bottle hanging on it. The bottle was polished so much it lit up like a lamp from the reflection of the sun. He wore a cotton cloth robe, but it's checkered pattern? Why? Because he wipes his knife on it after he cuts everything, meat, intestines, whatever. As the days gone by it went the same way as the razor sharpener in the salon.

So he just had the drink of his life from the liquor bar after work, and his legs were quaking as his words slurred, "This wine may be sorghum water, but it conquers the legs first on a man, can't see anything in front of me, like I've been possessed by a ghost!" He saw that there's a circle of people surrounding the proclamation? "I gotta see what this is about", so he forced his way in. He saw the proclamation, but he's illiterate, so he asks around. He taps another dude on the shoulder, 

"Yo! What's this shit?"

Other guy says, "Slow down, man, careful you don't get a side stitch. This is an imperial proclamation!"

"The hell is an imperial proclamation?"

"Something the Emperor posted!"

"Can you read it for me?"

"Sure thing! Listen here, 'Blessed by the Mandate of Heaven the Emperor, his rescript reads as thus: In the seventh year of Chenghua, the Ryukyu Kingdom sends their tribute. In reality, however, they sent an old Taoist to test his power against us... "

"All right stop! Don't read anymore. I don't understand any of this!?"

"Oh, so I did this for nothing?"

"So let me ask, what's the first two phrases?"

"Blessed by the Mandate of Heaven the Emperor, His rescript reads as thus?"

"The hell is 'His rescript reads as thus?'"

"If the Emperor speaks, it's 'his rescript reads as thus'"

"So what would be for me speaking?"

"Uh... I don't know what would be reading as thus."

"Fine, continue"

This man however's already tired of it since he has to read and then explain. He figured he might as well just tell Sun what it means, "So basically the Ryukyu's are a vassal state that sends tribute and their declaration as our servant every year, but this year they sent an old Taoist, who knows how to do 36 styles of silent debate, and can recite 70 volumes of the 'Diamond Sutra', he's coming to to test his power against us Chinese. If we beat him, then they'll continue their tribute and declaration every year. If we can't, or nobody takes up the challenge, then they the Ryukyus are now the lords, and we Great Ming are now the vassal states. The Emperor thus sends out a proclamation seeking able people, who knows how to silently debate and recite the Diamond Sutra, to take up the challenge. If they can beat that old Taoist, the Emperor will give them any amounts of money or as high of a court position as possible! But it's useless for you, you don't know how to silent debate or recite the Diamond Sutra."

He just had to go there, because this Sun Delong has a name for being a "jack of all trades". If you say he's not capable of something, he's going to get mad, "Stop! How do you know I don't know how to silent debate, or how to read the Diamond Sutra?"

"Oh? So you can?"

"If I don't, what do I have this head for?"

"Ah! Then that's great! Take the proclamation and go challenge the old Taoist!"

Sun was walking up to take the proclamation when the other guy thought that he should make absolutely sure, so he asked. "The imperial proclamation says the old Taoist knows 36 styles of silent debate, do you?"

"How many styles?"

"36."

"I know 72."

"Wow! Twice the styles... The old Taoist can recite 70 volumes of the Diamond Sutra."

"And the Diamond Sutra I can recite is endless!"

"Then take the proclamation."

"I can't reach."

"So what's that in your hand then?"

"My pig hook."

"So use it to hook the proclamation then."

"Right."

He hooked the proclamation off the post. The soldiers who were guarding the proclamation saw that a drunk had taken the proclamation, so they took out their rope and tied him up, pushing him to see the official in charge.

The official in charge is the Imperial Secretary Xie. However, Sun refused to kneel and instead turned his face in disgust, "So what's your last name?"

Minister Xie was baffled, "So he's prosecuting me instead the other way around? or what?" He thought. "It's 'Xie'."

"Minister Xie, do you have common sense?"

"What does that mean?"

"Am I supposed to take the old Taoist's challenge tied up?"

"Oh? So you're the sorcerer?"

Minister Xie immediately reprimands the two soldiers. "You reprehensible idiots! How can you bring the sorcerer to me tied up!" He personally unties Sun. There's only one seat in the office. "Sorcerer, please sit." Of course, it's supposed to be Minister Xie's seat, but Sun doesn't know that, so he sits right away. Not only does he sit, but he also annoyingly says, "Oh, where would you sit then?"

Minister Xie has to reply, "Then I'll stand."

"So, Minister, where do we find this damned Taoist?"

"He's living in the Golden Terrace Institute in the Legation Quarter. That being said we must first go meet his majesty."

"What's a majesty?"

"The Emperor"

"Oh great, long time no see for us bros." Apparently, Sun's bros with the Emperor.

"So sorcerer, do you want to ride a horse or a litter to the palace?"

"Neither."

"Neither? Then what sorcery will you use?"

"I want to ride an ass."

"Ride an ass? Where do we find one for you?"

"No ass, no go."

Minister Xie was flabbergasted, but he personally went to the Zhangyi Gate to rent a donkey foal so Sun could ride it to the Palace. He had Sun wait in the East Court in the Palace.

Minister Xie reports to the Emperor, and the Emperor was pleased. He orders an immediate audience. However, Minister Xie ponders a bit and decides that he can't let Sun see the Emperor, because Sun hasn't practiced the proper protocols in the Ministry of Rites, and he doesn't know what might come out of Sun's mouth. If Sun goes up to the Emperor and says something like "Yo bro, long time no see", then Minister Xie would certainly lose his head. Thus, Minister Xie immediately says, "Your majesty, the sorcerer isn't a native of Beijing, and just came recently. He also hasn't practiced the propr protocols in the Ministry of Rites, so I fear he may offend your majesty with his improper behavior. If it were up to me, I would send him to take the challenge first, and have an audience after. If he defeats the old Taoist, then it's easier to forgive his transgressions in behavior."

Thus, the Emperor agrees and sends for the old Taoist in the Golden Terrace Institute, telling him that China has in fact found someone to accept his challenge. The old Taoist orders two 10-meter platforms be built in front of the Hall of Supreme Harmony, and a table, incense burners, offerings, candelabrum, scroll paper, cinnabar brush, vegetables, grains, and a bowl or rainwater.

"Whatever your sorcerer wants, tell him to prepare himself." The old Taoist says, but Minister Xie ponders and just orders the same things for Sun. The orders were fulfilled quickly. The old Taoist shook his robe, and a dark whirlwind blew, lifting him onto his platform. The officials in court were shocked.

The emperor sends his edict, "Minister Xie, ask our sorcerer to take the challenge, and also ride the wind or cloud up to the platform." Minister Xie immediately goes to the East Court to find the "sorcerer". He goes in and sees Xun sleeping on the floor. Minister Xie goes up and yells, "Sorcerer! Wake up!"

"Quit disturbing me!"

"Who's disturbing you! Pull him up."

Sun rubs his eyes, and looks around. This is inside the palace, and it's golden all over.

"Ay! Old Minister! Where the hell is this?"

"In the palace."

"What am I doing here in the palace?"

"What? Did you forget? You're here to take the old Taoist's challenge. He's on the platform waiting for you. The Emperor also moved his throne outside to see you two duel."

Sun was terrified, "What?!" He was, of course, completely drunk, and after sleeping for so long he had forgotten pretty much everything. After Minister Xie explains, he starts thinking: I've drank too much, and in my drunken stupor I took the imperial proclamation, I'm just a goddamn merchant, how the hell do I know how to duel with old Taoists? Besides, it appears that this guy is from another country, so he must have evil intentions. Now I've really done it! He immediately slaps himself in the face four times, "I'm an idiot! an idiot!"

He kneels down to Minister Xie, "Old minister, I've had too much to drink! It was the alcohol! I'm a butcher, please find someone else to duel! I can't do this at all! If this isn't enough for you, please slap me some more, and let me go with the wind like a kite!"

"Ah!?"

Minister Xie's rage boiled over and he shook, his hat quaking. He's both angry and scared, "Oh? You had too much to drink? You're right, this is way too much! Can you still feel your head on your neck? Just slap you and let you go? You can say this to me, fine, if I tell the same to the Emperor, then I've deceived him and failed the country. Deceiving him might be no big deal, but the country will be in trouble. This old Taoist is already there, what is His Majesty going to say to him? How will the country handle the shame? Neither of us will keep our heads for this. You're the drunk idiot that pulled the proclamation and tricked the official in charge, I'm the one that failed in office and allowed idiots into the palace, and deceived the Emperor and failed the country. Even if we get our deserved death, what is the Emperor to do? He will lose face, and our China will lose face. The Ryukyu will be lord and Ming will be vassal, and the Empire will be destroyed and our people enslaved!"

Sun Delong hears this and also starts to panic, which brought the alcohol back into his bloodstream, so he jumps up.

"Old Minister, it's fine! If neither of us will live, then it's easy to deal with. If we're to die regardless of whether I duel the old Taoist or not, then let's just duel so at least we'll die with our wounds in front. Even if we lose our head, it's just going to be a scab the size of a bowl. Maybe I'm not as good at sorcery as he is, but it's not certain he can fight as well as me! Let's go find him."

Minister Xie hears this and wonders, "Does he know how to duel or not?" 

"Just go!" Minister Xie, out of options, leads him to the platforms and points to the one in the east, "See? He's already meditating up there."

Sun Delong takes a look and says, "Then I'm going on the other one. If we go on the same one, we'd fight for that territory."

"Just go!"

"How tall is it?"

"Ten meters!"

"Ten meters? Even if it's 30, that's no big deal, attendants!."

"What for?"

"Get me a ladder."

"Ladders are a no-go, the Emperor has already ordered that you ride the wind or clouds, because the old Taoist took the wind up."

The old Taoist, in fact, did not ride the wind. It's a trick. Inside his sleeve is an iron cylinder with wolf manure, charcoal, and Mayflower gloryberry inside, lit up. When he needs it, he shakes his robes and the cylinder's cover falls off, black smoke then pours out of it from his sleeves and neckline. Wolf manure provides the constant burn, but it's the mayflower that provides the black smoke that looks like a dark whirlwind surrounding him. Thus, with that cover he simply climbs up using hooks worn on his arm and legs.

Sun Delong hears about wind and cloud, so he asks, "What kind of wind?"

"Obviously, the Guiding Wind."

"All I know is passing wind."

"That won't do."

"Fuck it then, I'm not going without a ladder."

"Don't!"

Sun Delong again panics and paces in circles around the platform.

"Don't go there, the Emperor is there!"

"I need to sneak a peek"

Minister Xie was annoyed. Who peeks at the Emperor?

"Who's sitting there?" Sun asks,

"The Emperor, obviously."

"So who's the eight giants next to him?"

"That's the guards, The Golden Macemen."

"What's that in their hands?"

"The Golden Maces"

"So bring the tallest one to me. I have something to discuss with him."

Minister Xie goes and sees that it is in fact Hall of Supreme Harmony Guardsman of the First Class Bai Wenyuan.

"Lord Bai, here's a friend that wants to meet you, the sorcerer Sun who's here to duel. This is Hall of Supreme Harmony Guardsman of the First Class Lord Bai Wenyuan"

"Oh, Minister Bai, good tiding to you, please help me."

"What do you need?"

"I need to get up there"

"What's that got to do with me?"

"Without you I can't get up there."

"How so?"

"Think, this platform is ten meters tall, how tall are you?"

"Me? His majesty only picks the tallest for his guard. I'm in fact two meters seven."

"What about the golden mace?"

"Handle is four meters two, three decimeters for the mace, total four meters five."

"Ah, that's right. Four meters five plus two meters seven, that's seven meters two. It's only a bit from ten meters."

What's he calculating? Bai Wenyuan wonders.

"So, just let me sit on the mace, and you catapult me up there..." Sun says.

"What? I...'ve never heard of this!"

"If you don't, I'm leaving."

Minister Xie immediately runs over, "Lord Bai, please help him and just give it a try."

Bai Wenyuan was shaking with anger. Just what the hell is this? But he complies anyway. He lets Sun climb onto the mace, and vaults. With his strength, Sun flies 14 meters into the air, way past the platform. It would seem like Sun is in trouble because of the fall, but he was actually okay. Remember he has that meter and half hook? He reached the hook out to the platform to break his fall, and slid down it once it reached. Not only was he not injured, but he actually arrived standing up.

The old Taoist was meditating with his eyes closed, so he didn't see what Sun Delong was doing at all. When he opened his eyes, all he saw was Sun descending from 14 meters in the air. He was frightened, "Wow! There are indeed talented people in China! I only rode the whirlwind, they came straight from heaven!"

He then takes a look at Sun Delong and was even more frightened, "This man has fortuitous clouds at his feet and golden light protecting his body!" The reason is, of course, that Sun had kicked the incense pot over when he landed, and the incense ash poured out around him. As for the golden light, it's because of his oiled cotton clothes, which reflected brightly in the sunlight. Usually in battle, the side that loses their heart first loses, the old Taoist was shaking with fear. He warns himself to be careful, which only psyched himself out more. He holds out his hand and speaks.

"Amita!"

Even though he's short, his voice was like a bronze bell. The old Taoist has invoked his first chant, and Sun thinks to himself that he must return one.

"Good stuff!"

So the old Taoist says:

"Amitabha!"

And he hears that the old Taoist has added a syllable, so he adds a bunch.

"A bunch of junk stuff!"

The old Taoist was baffled. "I don't have that much stuff!" He thinks, "Might as well silently debate then!" He holds out a finger, which means:

"Don't underestimate me, I have The One Buddha saluting me!" 

Sun of course, doesn't know that. He says he knew how to silently debate, but it's not the same thing. It's the kind of debate he has with customers in the butchery. He sees that the old Taoist has held out a finger, and was enraged, 

"What's this? He thinks he's one generation older than me? Fuck you!"

He holds out two fingers. What does he mean?

"You think you're my uncle? Your dad's two generations behind me!"

The old Taoist thought, "Wow! My one finger is The One Buddha saluting me, so he counters with Two Saints shielding him!" He then raises three fingers, which means "The Three August ones rules the Earth". Sun Delong doesn't know, but he thinks:

"This is a trick, he raises one so I give him two, he's going to give me three, but if I give him four he's giving me five, and I don't have six fingers to give back. Therefore, I'm taking the five first!"

The old Taoist was amazed, "The Three August Ones rules the Earth" is indeed countered by "The Five Emperors are sovereign." He then slaps his chest, meaning "The One Buddha in my heart." Sun was again enraged, "So now you think you're my father-in-law?" He slaps his head, which means "You think you're my father-in-law? I'm slapping you and your daughter!" The old Taoist again saw that his "The One Buddha in my heart" being countered by "Heaven is above my head".

The old Taoist had to evaluate his options - he couldn't win the silent debate, so he took the scroll paper and pulls his sword out. "What? Is he going to slit his own throat?" The Taoist cuts the paper into three pieces and drew a charm on each with the cinnabar brush. He lights the candelabrum and then the scroll with the candle. He starts chanting as he shakes his sword, and the scroll starts burning brighter, which he wants to use to burn Sun Delong. Sun Delong taunts him, "Playing with fire? Aren't you a bit old for this? If you play with fire too much you'll piss your bed at night, and your mother will spank you!"

The old Taoist was incensed, so he continues to spin the fire, which grew from the size of a teacup to a plate. Why didn't it burn out the scroll? It's because the old Taoist has applied a special formula with the cinnabar to keep it burning. He threw the flaming scroll at the other platform, and it flew towards Sun's face. Sun dodges to the left and lets it pass, but his hair, which Ming Dynasty people usually wear in a bun on their head, caught fire, and half of his head was burnt off. Luckily for Sun, there was a bowl of rainwater on the platform, so he took it and put the fire out. The Old Taoist sees the charm has failed, so he starts burning the second one. Sun Delong sees this and was angered, "Oh, so you're kicking me while I'm down? You want to burn the other half so I'd have to become a monk and go beg for food with you? Fuck that! I'm attacking first!" He takes his hook and aims it at the old Taoist.

The old Taoist was still chanting with his eyes closed, which gave Sun enough time to aim. He throws the pig hook tail first towards the old Taoist "Look at this stuff!" If he didn't yell this he'd hit the old Taoist in the face, but since he yelled, the old Taoist opens his eyes and sees something flying towards him. "Amita!" He yells and dodges to the right. The pole of course missed, but the hooks behind it didn't, and cleaves two strands of flesh right off the old Taoist's cheek. "Amitabhaaaaaaaaaaaa!" The old Taoist screams. Sun Delong taunts again, "Doesn't pay attention, take this stuff!" 

The old Taoist examines the pig hook and doesn't know what it is, and becomes more frightened, "Aya! I forgot he descended from heaven and has fortuitous clouds and golden light shielding him! This man is a true arhat and even has Gautama Buddha's Eight Treasures As-You-Will Purple Gold Hook!"

Sun Delong was delighted! "Idiot! My hair can still grow back, what pot-fixer can repair your face?"

This only served to frighten the old Taoist more, as he also noticed Sun's purse and wine bottle hanging on his belt. In his panic he thought they were the hundred-treasure pouch and heaven-flipping seal. As he kept frightening himself, he finally decided to use the foremost stratagem of the thirty six - retreat!

"Amita! I'm going back to my country to report!"

"If you leave I'm using my power!"

"No, Don't! I'll report to your Emperor first!"

The old Taoist leaps off the platform and runs up to the Hall of Supreme Harmony, kowtowing again and again. "Please forgive your vassal's transgressions! Please forgive your vassal's transgressions!"

Of course, the Emperor didn't understand any of it. He only heard the stuff about "Amita" and "Good stuff" and didn't get it. He then saw the old Taoist setting things on fire and then Sun Delong putting it out with water. "Of course! Water beats fire!" He then saw the old Taoist lighting fire again, and was annoyed, but then while he was staring at the fire, he saw that the Taoist's cheeks were then gashed. He clapped happily, "We've won! Good! Good!" He saw that the old Taoist has descended and knew that the old Taoist admitted defeat.

"What do you have to say?"

"Ah! Your majesty! Please forgive us! We admit defeat and will tribute and declare every year!"

"Of course! We must know, however, what is 'Amita'?"

"That's how we Taoists greet people."

"What about his 'Good stuff'?"

"I don't know, what's good stuff?"

"What about 'Amitabha'?"

"It's also a greeting."

"What about his 'A bunch of junk stuff!'?"

"He has too much stuff" The old Taoist points to his cheek "Look at this stuff I took!"

"Then what was that finger?"

"The One Buddha saluting me!" 

"What about his two?"

"Two Saints shielding him!" 

"What about your three?"

"'The Three August Ones rules the Earth', then your sorcerer counters with 'The Five Emperors are sovereign.' I slapped my chest meaning 'The One Buddha in my heart', and he counters with a slap on his head meaning 'Heaven is above my head'".

"So what about that fire?"

"Please forgive me! I wanted to toss him off the platform."

"For a man of mercy you sure are merciless! What about your face?"

"Eight Treasures As-You-Will Purple Gold Hook."

So then he was dismissed and goes to await the Emperor's judgment.

The Emperor's attendant then looks on the platform "Wait, why is our sorcerer still up there?" Of course, Sun Delong couldn't get down, and he's pacing on the platform wondering if he had won or not. The Emperor sees and says, "Our sorcerer must be wounded by that demon fire, have somebody help him down." So immediately a ladder was raised and Sun Delong gets off the platform. Minister Xie walks over and says, "The Emperor requires your audience, just kowtow and try not to speak." Why? He's still afraid of that possible "Hey bro, long time no see". Sun Delong enters the Hall of Supreme Harmony and salutes the Emperor, "Hey!" 

Are you going to bite me? The Emperor wonders, but then Sun says.

"I am kowtowing to your majesty."

Of course, since he won, the Emperor was happy, "Raise your head."

Normally, it's against protocol to raise your head and you're supposed to say, "It's a crime to" and the Emperor would then say, "We pardon it", but Sun Deleng doesn't know that and raises his head immediately to stare at the Emperor, "What?"

The Emperor laughed, "So did you win or not?"

Sun Delong is afraid of this, because he doesn't know if he won or not. He lowers his head. The Emperor asks again, "Did you win or not?" He turns his head and sees the old Taoist, so when the Emperor asks a third time, he answers, "Your majesty, I can't answer that. If I say I won, then I'm boasting, but if I say I didn't win, what did I come here for? If you don't have the skills you don't get the kills."

Minister Xie is annoyed, "What's all this small talk?"

"Please don't ask me who won, you should ask him. If he says I lost then I lost, if I said I won then I won. Old Taoist! If you say I lost, then let's go back up there for round two!"

The old Taoist holds his cheek and says, "Please no! He won!"

"What's the sorcerer's name?" The Emperor asks.

"My name is Sun Delong and I live in the butchery street. The Delong Butchery is mine. I've never cheated a customer and you'll always get 16 ounces to your pound!"

Who asked him about that?

"So after you met, what's 'Amita'?" The Emperor asks.

"Oh that's simple! I know him."

The old Taoist was surprised. He knows me? I don't know him?

"This man is here to beg for money."

"Why 'Amita'?"

"In my butchery, whenever someone comes to beg, if it's a monk they'll say 'Mitabha", if it's a Taoist they'll say, "Amita', both means 'Give me money.'"

"Then what's 'Good stuff'?"

"I said 'Good stuff' because I was thinking, 'How the hell is there another one when two already begged from me?"

The old Taoist starts to grimace.

"Then in the silent debate, what's that one finger?"

Sun Delong however started thinking: Maybe the Emperor is going to punish the old Taoist, and the worst punishment is the nine familial exterminations. If I tell the Emperor about that generation stuff, then even if it's four generations apart it's still not out of the nine. I need to say something else. This is where the old Taoist is finally mentally slain:

"Your majesty, we were discussing business."

"How so? He sticks one out, you stick two, he then sticks three and you stick five. He slaps his chest and you slap your head. Isn't that silent debate?"

"No, your majesty, it's business"

"What kind of business?"

"He knows I'm a butcher, and in his temple there's going to be a feast, so he wants to buy a pig. I tell him go ahead, I even have two for you. He wants one that's at least three hundred pounds, I tell him I've got ones that's more than five hundred pounds, he asks if the heart, liver and lungs come with it, and I tell him that he can have the pig head too!"

tl'dr: Chinese xiangsheng piece parallel of the Muslim Ban joke that u/GaryV83_at_Work put up.






If Bruno Mars married Venus Williams on Earth, do you think they'd have a Sun? Only if they planet.
Why did Adele cross the road? To say Hello from the other side.
My girlfriend wanted to act out a scene from Fifty Shades of Grey It was the scene where Christian wanted to buy Anastasia a new Audi...
I tried out for the suicide club But I just couldn't hang with them.
Me: I hate fucking laundry Dad: Well stop fucking it and fold it already. 
Masturbation When I was a teenager my father told me "If you keep doing that you'll go blind".  I said "Can't I just do it until I need glasses?" Proof: Glasses.
Man, those UC students after MILO... Must have been Burn-e supporters. 
There are 3 types of republicans.. There are 3 camps of GOP supporters:
#1 The McCain camp or Republicans
#2 The McConnell camp or Republican'ts
#3 The Trump Camp or Republicunts
The Trump Travel ban was refused due to lack of evidence.. Apparently "I know it, you know it, everybody knows it" wasn't enough
Why is it ridiculously easy to overcome the walls of Jerusalem? Because it's covered in holiness. 
Why did the blind man fall into the well? Because he couldn't see that well.
I have never gone to bed with an ugly woman, but I have waken up next to some many of them
Grandpa's toothbrush Grandpa: I need a new toothbrush becuase one hair of it broke

Shopkeeper: why do you want to buy a whole new brush when only one rush hair is broke?

Grandpa: It was the only hair left
Why did the blonde climb the roof of the pub? The drinks were on the house.
Wanna hear an overused joke about necrophilia and bestiality? You're just fucking a dead horse...

(Sorry if this is a repost, I heard this at school)
What two types of people don't care about age, Abortion clinics and necrophiliacs. 
What is a mathematician's favorite thing to find in the woods? A log.
What kind of Bees give the Most Milk? Boo Bees
To gay guys first aid means Losing your virginity
What do a poultry farmer and a hooker have in common? They both raise cocks for a living.
I wasn't originally going to get a brain transplant... But then I changed my mind
What's a Terrorists favourite category to watch on YouTube? Trending. Because all the videos there blow up.
Pacifism is a martial art. Its moves are designed to bruise the opponent's knuckles with your face.
Mary had a little lamb The doctor fainted.
The parrot without legs A guy is browsing in a pet shop and sees a parrot sitting on a little perch. It doesn't have any feet or legs. The guy says aloud, "Jeesh. I wonder what happened to this Parrot?"    

The parrot says, "I was born this way. I'm a defective parrot."
    
"Holy shit," the guy replies. "You actually understood and answered me!"
    
"I got every word," says the parrot.” I happen to be a highly intelligent, thoroughly educated bird."
    
"Oh yeah?", the guy asks, "Then answer this -- how do you hang onto your perch without any feet?"
    
"Well," the parrot says, "this is very embarrassing but since you asked, I wrap my willie around this wooden bar like a little hook. You can't see it because of my feathers."

"Wow" says the guy, "you really can understand and speak English, can't you!?"

"Actually, I speak both Spanish and English and I can converse with reasonable competence on almost any topic: politics, religion, sports, physics, philosophy. I'm especially good at ornithology. You really ought to buy me. I'd be a great companion."

The guy looks at the $200 price tag.” Sorry, but I just can't afford that."

"Pssssssst" says the parrot, "I'm defective, so the truth is, nobody wants me cause I don't have any feet. You can probably get me for $20, just make the guy an offer!"

The guy offers $20 and walks out with the parrot. Weeks go by. The parrot is sensational. He has a great sense of humour, he's interesting, he's a great pal, he understands everything, he sympathizes, and he's insightful.

The guy is delighted. One day the guy comes home from work and the parrot goes "Psssssssssssst" and motions him over with one wing. "I don't know if I should tell you this or not, but it's about your wife and the postman."

"What are you talking about?" asks the guy.

"When the postman delivered today, your wife greeted him at the door in a sheer black nightie and kissed him passionately."

"WHAT???" the guy asks incredulously. "THEN what happened?"

"Well, then the postman came into the house and lifted up her nightie and began petting her all over" reported the parrot.

"My God!" he exclaims. "Then what?"

"Then he lifted up the nightie, got down on his knees and began to lick her all over, starting with her breasts and slowly going down..."

"WELL???" demands the frantic guy, "THEN WHAT HAPPENED?"

"Damned if I know. I got a hard-on and fell off my perch."
I like my friends like my chromosomes Not enough.
What did the cheese say to the other cheese after a game of tennis? That was a "Gouda" Game!
A blonde and a brunette are walking in a park, the brunette says awwww look a dead bird poor thing.

The blonde looks up and says where?
A Nazi goes to a bar... A Nazi goes to a bar, looks around, and sees an Orthodox Jew sitting at a nearby table.

"Barkeep!", he says, "A round on me for everyone but that gentleman right there." 

Everyone in the bar receives a cocktail, he looks over at the Jew and notices him smiling back. The Nazi is not amused, goes back to the bar

"Barkeep! I want to order a second round for everyone but him, and this time make it all top shelf".

Nazi looks again at the Jew, sees him STILL smiling back.

"Is that Jew an idiot or what?"

Bartender responds: "Oh no my friend, that's the owner."
What do you call a gay midget with great timing? A Metro-Gnome
When I was a kid I asked my mum what a couple was... She said: 'Oh, two or three'. 

Now, she wonders why her marriage didn't work.
I found a copy of Mission Impossible 3 among my blu-rays the other day... I thought to myself: 'It's not really impossible if he's already done it twice."
Dinner A husband and a wife sit at the table, having dinner. The woman drops a bit of tomato sauce on her white top. "Och, I look like a pig!" 

The man nods, "And you dropped tomato sauce on your top!"


A teacher asks her student a question... "if there's two birds on a power line and somebody shoots one of them, how many birds are left?"

" Zero" the boy said "the others would have flown away"

"Actually the correct answer is two" said the teacher "but I like where your heads at." 

The boy came back to school next day and asked the teacher a question. "If there's three women sitting on a bench eating ice cream and one is licking their ice cream, one is chomping on theirs and the other is sucking on theirs, which one is married?" 

The teacher answered "the woman sucking her ice cream." 

The boy replied "actually it's the one with the wedding ring but I like where your heads at."

Stevie Wonder got a cheese grater for Christmas He said it was the most violent book he'd ever read
Bored Proctologist A Proctologist who got tired of his profession decided to follow his lifelong dream and become a mechanic. After 2 years of school, he took a final exam where he passed with 150 percent. Confused, the Ex Proctologist asked how that was possible. The teacher replied that he received 50 points for correctly disassembling the motor, 50 points for correctly reassembling the motor, and 50 points for doing everything through the exhaust pipe.
A little boy caught a priest masterbating... "What are you doing?"
 asked the boy.
I'm Masterbating.   You'll be doing is soon enough." explained the priest.    "Why?" asked the boy.   "Because my wrist is god damn exhausted!!"

My dentist gives me cavity searches all the time. I think I need a new dentist..
I'm participating in a marathon this year. I'm the guy that pours cups of water for the runners. 
What did Donald Trump say after getting catfished? **FAKE NUDES!**
I gave my cows ecstasy thinking they'll make more milk But the steaks were high.
Why did the guitar teacher get arrested? Because he was an arsonist.
I knew this girl that tried to trade sex for adderall. What an attention whore.
Three guys were sitting in a bar talking. One was a Doctor, one was a Lawyer, and one was a Biker. After a sip of his martini, the doctor said; "You know, tomorrow is 
my anniversary. I got my wife a diamond ring and a new Mercedez. I 
figure that if she doesn't like the diamond ring, she will at least
like the Mercedez, and she will know that I love her."

After finishing his scotch, the lawyer replied; "Well, on my last 
anniversary, I got my wife a string of pearls and a trip to the 
Bahamas. I figured if she didn't like the pearls, she would at least
like the trip, and she would know that I love her."


The Biker then took a big swig from his beer, and said; "Yah, well 
for my anniversary, I got my old lady a tee-shirt and a vibrator. I
figured if she didn't like the tee-shirt, she could go fuck herself."

Me in a nutshell: Agh! What the Hell! Why am I in a nutshell!
Three missionaries in Africa Three missionaries are going to evangelize tribes in the deep jungle, where they heard dangerous tribes exist.  
What had to happen happened, and they got caught by a warriors tribe. Everybody is killed except the missionaries and one native interpreter.  
The tribe chief tells the first missionary:  
"You have been considered by the mighty tribe of Koungata. Now you have to choose: Tounga, or death.  
- Well, said the missionary, I don't know Tounga but anything is better than death! I choose Tounga.  
- Very well! Tounga it is, then."  
Then three huge warriors approach, bend the missionary over and have their way with him, brutally. The screams can be heard for a full hour.
Then it's the turn of the second missionary, who is deathly pale but still choose Tounga, and gets pounded by three new huge warriors.  
When it's the turn of the third missionary, he just can't take it and says:  
" I can't, this is too much, I'd rather die a martyr than suffer such indignity! I choose death!  
- Very well, answers the chief, you chose death. You will have death, by Tounga ! 

I too believe more women should be in Government. That's why I support Betsy DeVos.
What direction was Kanye West facing when his dough was rising? Yeast ;D

*cringe*
They say you should work until your bank account looks like a phone number. I checked my balance and realized, if that was true, I could retire! I have $9.11 in my account. 
Why did the squirrel blush after he was hit by a car? He was flattered.
A 4 letter word for "talks nonstop" I keep trying to enter girl, but it doesn't work. 
I think the writers did this wrong. 
Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sylvester Stallone and Jason Statham were sitting around a table When they came up for an idea for a TV series based on the lives of classical musicians. They had all the details nailed down: the music, the plot, the decor, etc.

However, they couldn't decide which character each actor was going to play in the series. Eventually, the three came to an agreement.

Stallon said: "I like Canon in D, so i'll be Pachelbel"

Statham said: "I like Moonlight Sonata, so i'll be Beethoven"

Schwarzenegger said: "I like Toccata and Fugue, so i'll be Bach"
A neutron walks into a bar and says "how much for a drink?" The bartender says, "for you, no charge!"
When Life gives you a cheese grater... You hold it up and say, 'Life's grate'.
Where do suicide bombers go when they die? All over the place
What do you call a group of terrorists with music degrees? Al coda
An Archaeologist Found an Ancient Vase at a Dig Site... and as he began to inspect the runes carved in it, he started dusting it off, and a genie came screaming out of it in rage.


"**Who disturbs my slumber**! I have been asleep for thousands of years, and *you* dare to wake ***me***? I should kill you where you stand!"

The archaeologist, whose name was Benjamin, cowered in terror as the genie fumed before him, hoping that the genie's rage might be sated without him ending up dead.

"Fine," the genie grumbled finally after a tense silence. "I will let you live, with one condition. You must not shave or cut the hair on your head, for when you do, I will turn you into an urn just like the one from which I came. Remember! I will not forget."


As Benjamin timidly removed his arm from his face, he saw a flash of light, and *poof* the genie was no more, and only the urn remained to remind him of the curse that had been placed upon him.


Finishing up his business at the dig site, he returned home to his job in artifact restoration at a museum in the city where he lived. The genie's urn he had left in the tomb where it lay, sealing the room shut when the expedition had left.


After many years had passed, Benjamin began to have difficulty dealing with his hair. A scraggly mustache and beard drooped down his chin to his chest, and his shoulder-length hair was a constant irritation whenever he looked in the mirror.

Finally, after a day of itching and scratching at his face and head, he gave up. 

"Surely the genie will not carry out the curse. Maybe if I just trimmed my beard a bit, he would let me alone."


The next few minutes found Benjamin in his bathroom facing the mirror, scissors in hand. Taking a deep breath, he placed the scissors close to his chin to cut off the ends of his beard. His hand began to close, and just as the first few strands of hair were severed from his body---


"**FOOL!** You ignored my command, and for that, you shall *die*!" shouted the genie, who appeared out of nowhere.


Suddenly, Benjamin was no more, and all that was left was an ancient-looking urn on the ground where his feet had been planted.

And that was the end of Benjamin.


Now, what can we learn from this sad, sad tale?

...


...


...

*A Benny shaved, is a Benny urned.*

Hear about the famous chain-smoking Dutch painter? Vincent Van Cough
My girlfriend found one of my puns so funny that she flew into space and told it to an alien. Unfortunately, the alien didn't laugh. Personally, I think she took the joke a bit too far. 
I went by the house I grew up in and asked if I can take a look around, but they said "no" and slammed the door on me My parents can be real jerks sometimes.
The dad, husband and pastor of a woman arrive outside a hospital delivery room The nurse stated that the hospital policy only allowed one person to be in the delivery room with the woman. Unfortunately, all 3 became confused when the woman giving birth screamed, "FATHER I NEED YOU".
I like my men like I like my coffee Made by my mother-in-law.
A female weightlifter goes to the doctor A female weightlifter goes to the doctor and says "I've been taking steroids that long I've grown a cock"

Doctor "Anabolic"?

Female " No, just a cock" 
taxi A taxi passenger tapped the driver on the shoulder to ask him a question.

The driver screamed, lost control of the car, nearly hit a bus, went up on the sidewalk, and stopped inches from a shop window.

For a second, everything went quiet in the cab, then the driver said, "Look friend, don't ever do that again. You scared the daylights out of me!"

The passenger apologized and said he didn't realize that a little tap could scare him so much.

The driver replied, "Sorry, it's not really your fault. Today is my first day as a cab driver - I've been driving a hearse for the last 25 years."
Blind man During summer there was a day that was so hot it was almost unbearable. 

In an old church, with no fans or air conditioning there was two nuns and a priest. The nuns clothing was making them so hot since it was not very breathable material. 

So they decided to go to the priest and ask, "Father, can we please remove these clothes! It is just too hot and we can not take it anymore!", to which the priest replied, "Absolutely not! It is forbidden to be nude around others as a nun!". The nuns were very disheartened, and were becoming emotional. The priest see's this and as he is a kind man he offers a compromise, "You may remove your clothing but as long as you stay in your rooms, lock the doors, and allow no one in with your clothes off!".

The nuns were extremely happy with this and ran off to their rooms as quickly as possible, and undressed. A couple hours later, one of the nuns hears a knock on the door, **knock** **knock** **knock**. She is surprised since there is supposed to be no one around besides the other none and priest. She calls out "Who is it? What do you want?", a mans voice replies with "Its the blind man." The nun is very relieved as she does not have to get dressed since the man is blind and can not obviously see her with no clothes on. So she opens the door and greets the man, "Hi sir, what can I help you with?" and the man replies with "Nice tits sister, now where can I put these blinds?"
bad ass 
A Marine Aviator lands on an Aircraft Carrier. He gets out of his aircraft and has a shoe box under his arm.
He goes down to the Mess Hall for lunch, looks around and says " I"m the baddest dude on this ship and I can prove it"!
He opens the shoe box and pulls out a snapping turtle. He pokes the turtle in the eyes, it opens its mouth and he pulls his dick out of his pants and puts it into the turtles mouth. The turtle starts biting down, blood is shooting all over and everyone in the Mess Hall is shocked.
He pokes the turtle in the eyes again it opens its mouth and he puts his dick back into his pants.
He looks around and says " any of you bad enough to do that"!
A young Navy Recruit from the back says " I'LL give it a try, just don't poke me in the eyes"!
The biggest question of our generation... Who makes the sandwich in a lesbian relationship?
A father-son talk A father asked his 12 year old son if he knew how babies were made, so the kid started crying: I don't want to know! Please don't tell me!
The confused father asked the boy why he didn't want to know.
"Because when I was 6 I was told the easter bunny wasn't real. When I was 7 you told me the tooth fart wasn't real and when  I was 10 I found out santa wasn't real!
Now you're gonna tell me adults don't actually screw?!"
Here's the thing about George Clooney's wives... Once you've seen one, you've seen Amal.
How long are math snakes? 3.14 feet. Well, at least the πthon is 



(I'm so sorry)
Can a woman make a man a millionaire? Yes, if he's a billionaire.﻿
What happens after NASA farts? It apollogises. 
Why did Bobby Shmurda go to jail? He was convicted with second degree shmurder
Life is like a chalk of boxlets... Ya never know what yer gonna ship.
Trump heard that some of Patriots weren't coming to the White House. They say he was deflated.
Snowman puns to celebrate the snowstorm in my area What do vampires get when they bite snowmen?
"Frostbite"

What is a snowman's favorite cereal?
"Snowflakes"

Why didn't the snowman answer the question?
"He didn't snow the answer"

What does a snowman like to ride?
"An icicle"

How can you tell a snowman is angry at you?
"You get the cold shoulder... or an icy stare" 
I'm almost a millionaire! I have all the zeros, just looking for the one.
I was having trouble staying awake at work but my coworker beat me to the last cup of coffee in the pot. It's like they say: if you lose you snooze.
Does anyone else get as excited about Valentine's Day coming up as they did about Christmas when they were little? Or is it just because I'm Jewish?
What do you call a pencil that won't draw on colored paper? An erase-ist (e-racist).
What did the doctor say to the annoying patient who didn't like the way he was stitching up his cut? Suture self.
Two black guys are pissing off a dock and into a lake... *Two black guys are pissing off a dock and into a lake...*

*...one guy says to the other:*
**"Man, this water's cold!"**

*The other guy replies:*
**"And deep too!"**
After accidentally shooting his pet with the shrink ray, my friend decided to give the pet away. It's my newt now.
Why do hipsters love field hockey? Because it's ice hockey before it gets cool.
When are men the smartest? NSFW Before sex, during sex, or after sex?




During sex because he's plugged into miss know it all!

Edit: a word

An Englishman, an Irishman and a Scotsman.. A Scotsman, an Irishman, and an Englishman are each sentenced to a year in solitary confinement; before being locked away, each is to be granted a year's supply of whatever he wants to help him get through the long, long spell alone.

The Scotsman asks for a year's supply of whisky; it's given to him and he's locked away.

The Irishman asks for a year's supply of Guinness so he's locked up with several thousand bottles of it.

The Englishman asks for a year's supply of cigarettes and he's given a pile of cartons and the cell door is shut on him.

One year later, the doors are all unlocked.

The Scotsman staggers out and shouts, 'I'm free!' and then keels over dead from alcohol poisoning.

The Irishman is dragged out into the light, whereupon he promptly dies of liver failure.

When the door to the Englishman's cell is opened, everybody watches eagerly to see what sort of a wreck the man has made of himself.

To their surprise, he walks right out the door, sidles up to the first person he sees, and asks, 'I say you wouldn't happen to have a match, would you?'


What did a passing motorist say to the elderly SS Officer? Give it some gas grandpa!
My friend told me to try out a gloryhole, since you can pretend it's a woman on the other side I've sucked 5 dicks so far and I still have no idea how this is supposed to work
I prayed to god to end violence on earth. He responded to my ticket saying "You shouldn't have rolled on a PvP server"
A Young guy from Nebraska A young guy from Nebraska moves to Florida and goes to a big "everything under one roof" department store looking for a job.
The Manager says, "Do you have any sales experience?" The kid says, "Yeah. I was a salesman back in Omaha." Well, the boss liked the kid and gave him the job. "You start tomorrow." I'll come down after we close and see how you did."
His first day on the job was rough, but he got through it. After the store was locked up, the boss came down. "How many customers bought something from you today? The kid says, "One".
The boss says, "Just one? Our sales people average 20 to 30 customers a day. How much was the sale for?" The kid says, "$101,237.65 ". The boss says, "$101,237.65? What the heck did you sell?"
The kid says, "First, I sold him a small fish hook. Then I sold him a medium fishhook. Then I sold him a larger fishhook. Then I sold him a new fishing rod. Then I asked him where he was going fishing and he said down the coast, so I told him he was going to need a boat, so we went down to the boat department and I sold him a twin engine Boston Whaler. Then he said he didn't think his Honda Civic would pull it, so I took him down to the automotive department and sold him that 4x4 Expedition."
The boss said, "A guy came in here to buy a fish hook and you sold him a BOAT and a TRUCK?"
The kid said, "No, the guy came in here to buy Tampons for his wife, and I said, 'Dude, your weekend's shot, you should go fishing.'"
A man farted every morning when he woke up. His wife got very annoyed and disgusted by this, so she made a plan to get him to stop. One day after the man farted, she said "honey, you know if you keep forcing those farts every morning your guts will slip right out." You see, the wife was a butcher. That night she took some pig's guts home from the shop in a cooler and stuffed them in the man's pants while he was sleeping. The next morning the wife woke up and her husband was in the bathroom for the next 2 hours. He comes out and the wife asks what he had been doing in there. The man replied "You were right about my guts dear, but with the help of God and my own two fingers I managed to get them back up there!"
The only person in my life that told me to smile... Was the camera man.
Fun fact: there are obese people outside the USA yeah, fat americans on vacation... 
Someone once asked me why I don't tell 'your mom' jokes... I responded by saying that 'your mom' are so overused.
Just like your mom
Why does Dr. Pepper come in a bottle? Mr. Pibb can't perform.
for those of you with a sense of humour and are sick of car ads try this when you see a car ad in your mind replace the word "car" with "cat" when you look at your cat he/she will think your ready for the loonie bin
I need to find the watch I misplaced But I can't seem to find the time.
In the beginning, God created the dog. He told it, "For 20 years, you are to sit near the door and bark at whoever walks by."

The dog responded, "20 years? That's a long time to do that. How about I do that for 10 years and give you back the remainder?"

God agreed. He then created the monkey and told it, "For 20 years, you are to entertain and bring joy to others."

The monkey replied, "20 years is a long time to do that. What if I do it for 10 years and give you back the rest of the time?"

God agreed. He proceeded to create the cow to which He told, "For 40 years, you are to slave and provide others with milk and labor."

The cow protested, "That's a long time to do that. What if I do half and give you back the remainder?"

God agreed. He finally created man and said to him, "For 25 years, you are to eat, sleep, marry, and have fun."

Man asks, "Only 25 years? That's not nearly enough time. Couldn't you give me the remainder of the time that the animals gave back?"

God agreed. That is why now after marriage, we spend 20 years slaving and providing for our family, 10 years entertaining our grandchildren, and 10 more years sitting near the door and barking at whoever walks by.
(NSFW) Someone ordered pizza to the twin towers on 9/11... They got two large plains
This joke is ironic. This joke is not ironic.

Isn't that ironic?
People need to learn to live in the moment, because the here and now is a special gift. That’s why I call it the present.
Why are black people so loud? Because they think we can't hear them  ;)
Friend asked to use my phone to call his mom.. Told him to just hit redial.
John, Ted and Dave went to have an adventure in the Amazon Jungle... ...unfortunately, they we're captured by a local cannibal tribe. 

The tribe leader gave them each a chance to live and be escorted out of the forest with one condition, they have to pass the tribe leader's trial: To go find a fruit and go back with it.

John was the first one to come back and brought an apple with him. The leader then instructed that the fruit be inserted up John's ass for 5 seconds without him having any facial reactions. 3 seconds in and he let out a huge painful cry. The leader signaled his men to behead John and so they did.

Ted was next and brought a blueberry with him, he was instructed to do the exact same thing that John did. A split second remaining for the countdown to finish when Ted laughed uncontrollably, letting out tears. He was beheaded almost instantly.

In the afterlife, John asked why Ted did what he did when he was surely about to be spared by his life. Ted answered, "Dave was coming back carrying a fucking huge jackfruit, what the hell am i supposed to do?"
Who is Frosty the Snowman's most favorite comedian? Bill Brrrrr.


I'll see myself out...
A group of Boy Scouts and their leader were walking through a forest one day. They found their campsite and began to pitch their tents. There were ten boys, and each one had a tent. Once they were finished, they lit a campfire. They roasted marshmallows over the fire and sang songs until it was very late into the night. Each boy went into his own tent and into his own sleeping bag. At about two o'clock in the morning, there was a rustle in the bushes. The boys and their leader all woke up. Each one got out of his sleeping bag and then out of his tent to see what was making the noise. Once outside, the Boy Scouts found a large purple spotted monster with ten arms. The boys tried to run away, but each of the purple spotted monster's arms caught one boy. The monster quickly devoured all the scouts it had caught. The Boy Scout leader watched in horror because there was nothing he could do. He ran away as quickly as he could. He ran through the forest and all the way back to the Boy Scout base. When he got there, he was completely out of breath. The other leaders looked at him and asked what was wrong.

"Well, we set up camp as usual. Then, in the middle of the night, we heard a rustle. When we got out of our tents to see what it was, we found a purple spotted monster. The monster had ten arms and caught all ten boys. It gobbled them all up and there was nothing I could do"

"You must be lying. Tell us where the scouts really are."

"I'm not lying: that was the whole troop and nothing but the troop."
[NSFW] What does a superstitious pimp check every day? His whore-o-scope. 
A friend told me that laughter is the best medicine Now I understand why Jeff Dunham is so sick all the time
What type of bakery has the fastest service? A Russian bakery. 
A man isn't happy with the size of his... [long] John has a date planned with a very attractive young lady in a few weeks, and he's a bit nervous. 

You see, John is a fairly successful single man. He's got good looks, money, a luxurious loft apartment, and a convertible sports car. You can be sure that all of the ladies want him, but of all the things he has, there is one thing that he just wasn't happy with: the size of his penis. 

John decides he has enough money to get a penis enlargement. I mean, if a woman can get her barely an A mosquito bites exploded into bodacious DD tatas, then why can't he go from teenage Asian to Mandingo? 

So John makes an appointment to see a penis enlargement specialist. 

After waiting a few days he finally gets into his appointment he has been so anxious about. The surgeon asks: "So what can I do for you today John?" to which John replies "Y'know doc, I'm just not too happy with the size of my penis. It's kind of... ^small." The doctor thinks for a minute and then says: "Well, John, unfortunately I'm fresh out of penises at the moment. We won't really be able to do anything for you until I get my next shipment in a couple months." John seems devastated. He can't believe that he has to go on this date knowing this girl will laugh as soon as she catches a glimpse of his little Vienna sausage. He begs the doctor: "Please! There has to be *something* you can do to help me. I'm begging you!" The doctor responds: "Hmm.. give me just a moment." He walks out of the room, and returns a few minutes later. "I have potential good news for you John, but I'm not sure if you're going to be up for it. You see, I'm fresh out of penises, but I *do* have this baby elephant trunk. I know it's a bit odd, but it will make Mandingo looks like a little school boy." John thinks for a minute, and decides it isn't such a bad idea. "Anything is better than what I'm packing right now." John says.

John schedules the procedure, and ends up recovering a few days before his date. 

The big day comes, and John is more confident than ever. He picks her up in the roadster, makes undeniably confident eye contact, and is making her laugh all the way to the restaurant. Really, everything has been going beautifully. They arrive at a *fancy* restaurant, valet parks his car, and they are seated immediately. A minute later the waiter comes with a basket of bread rolls, places them on the table, and asks what they would like to drink. John orders them both the most expensive bottle of wine they had. The waiter leaves to retrieve the wine while John and his beautiful date look over the menu. John tells her that she can have *anything* she'd like. "Don't even look at the pricing, money isn't an issue." he says. The waiter returns with the wine, and they place their order. While waiting for their food they decide to dig into the rolls. They both get a roll, butter it, and begin eating. Everything seems dandy, and then out of **nowhere** a baby elephant trunk **SHOOTS** up from under the table, grabs a roll, and disappears. John's date was **amazed**. "**WOAH!** Can you do that again?!" she said. To which he replied:

"I can, but I don't think I could fit another roll up my ass."


What's the quickest way to get in touch with your inner self? Single-ply toilet paper
Clothing related typos... They're the vest
Queen Elizabeth may have lived to be 102, but Diana got up to 120 when she died.
What is the church music director's biggest fear? Crabs on their organ.
I said hello to a feminist today. Trials start next week.
What kind of cheese is not yours? American cheese.
I went to a seafood disco last night Pulled a mussel
The pension office demanded my 86 year old grandfather prove his age. He had no copy of his birth certificate and his driver's license had long since expired. But, he went to the office and demanded to see his administrator. He took off his hat, showed his white hair and balding head and said, "There, is that proof enough I'm old enough to receive a pension?" The administrator agreed and cut him his check. He proudly returned home to show grandmother and she said, "Great, but you should have taken off your pants and shown him your willy too, you would have got disability benefits."
An African immigrant just arrived in Italy and doesn't know how to make money He asks another immigrant, "So, how do you survive here?"
The immigrant says, "Well, it's very easy. You put up a sign around your neck saying you're hungry, and let people give you money. 8 hours a day, and you make around 50-60€."
"Wow", says the African immigrant, "I'll try to follow your advice. Thank you."
After a year, the two meet again.
The African immigrant is surprisingly wealthy. He wears a custom made Gucci tuxedo, a Rolex, and his hands are full of golden ornaments. 
"How did you become so rich?!" the immigrant asks.
The African immigrant replies, "I followed your advice. I put a sign saying <I'm an immigrant, I want to go home, please help me>"
Why do churches hate geometry? There's too many sins involved.
Why didn't the Koala get the job? He didn't have...


The Koala-fications.
What do you get when you combine Richard Simmons with Stephen Hawking? A fruit and a vegetable.
People keep asking me what I'll be doing in 3 years time Like come on guys I don't have 2020 vision 
Tom Brady has a perfect record in the Super Bowl He's 5 out of 7.
Trump plan to alleviate world hunger and illegal immigration . . . . . . he's going to round up all illegal aliens and issue them Soylent Green cards
What's the difference between a hookers and a drug dealer? A hooker can wash her crack and sell it again.
I had a dream last night that I was reading Lord of the Rings to people. Turns out I was just Tolkien in my sleep.
Who is the third member in a German and Russian gangbang? Poland
A marketing executive walks into a bar I guess it was set too low.
What does Altoid mean? I've always wondered what that word mint
Superman was flying above Metropolis When he saw Wonder Woman sunbathing on the roof of the Justice League, totally naked. Superman thinks to himself, 'Hey, I'm Superman, I could fly down there really fast and fuck Wonder Woman, and she'd never know.' So Superman flies down and fucks Wonder Woman so fast she doesn't even see him. When he's done, Wonder Woman sits up and says "What the fuck was that?", To which the Invisible Man replies, "I dunno, but my asshole is killing me."
What did the chemist shout, noticing only half his water was deuterated? DOH
A new priest is nervous about mass. After mass he asked the monsignor how he had done.
The monsignor replied, "When I am worried about getting nervous on the pulpit, I put a glass of vodka next to the water glass. if I start to get nervous, I take a sip."
So next Sunday he took the monsignor's advice. At the beginning of the sermon, he got nervous and took a drink. He proceeded to talk up a storm.
Upon his return to his office after mass, he found the following note on the door:

1.There are 10 commandments, not 12.

2.There are 12 disciples, not 10.


3.Jesus was consecrated, not constipated.

4.Jacob wagered his donkey, he did not bet his ass.

5.We do not refer to Jesus Christ as the late J. C.

6.The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are not referred to 
as Daddy, Junior and the Spook.

7.David slew Goliath, he did not kick the shit out of him.

8.When David was hit by a rock and was knocked off his donkey,don't say he was stoned off his ass.

9.We do not refer to the cross as the "Big T."

10.When Jesus broke the bread at the Last Supper he said, "Take this and eat it for it is my body." He did not say "Eat me"

11.The Virgin Mary is not called "Mary with the Cherry,"

12.The recommended grace before a meal is not: Rub-
A-Dub-Dub thanks for the grub, yeah God.

13.Next Sunday there will be a taffy pulling contest at St. Peter's, not a Peter pulling contest at St. Taffy's

14. Sip the Vodka, don't drink it.
What does America and Apple both have in common? They both started to de-port when jobs died.
This valentines day be sure not to buy flowers from any Monks. Because only you can prevent florist friars!
What do you call a fat girl in yoga pants at Walmart? Cashier
Only 1940 kids will get this A job
[Politics] Is mental gymnastics an Olympic Sport? If it is, Sean Spicer could take home the gold, silver and bronze for the US.
I have a date for Valentinesday 14. February
Trump's preparing Mexico for the Olympics. Every Mexican took gold in the pole vault.
How many gay men does it take to screw in a lightbulb? Just one, but it takes the entire ER staff to get it out.
I'm gonna name my first kid Robot. That way no matter what he'll always have a job!
I used to steal toys from the hobby shop, but they caught me when I started taking the Airfix sets I would have gotten away with it, too, if it weren't for you modelling kits!
What did the Chinese cat say? *mao*
The terra-cotta warriors are fake They were mass-produced in Chinese sweatshops.
Did you hear the one about my hairy, cannibalistic uncle? He was an aunt-eater. 
Why was the guitar teacher arrested? For fingering a minor.
I tried out for suicide club I didn't make the cut
What do you call the presidential toilet? The Donald Dump. 
What do you call two lesbians in a closet? A Liquor Cabinet
The boys asked, "Grandma, are you watching today's football match?" She asks which match. "Austria-Hungary". She answers… "Against whom?"

Stolen from r/witze.
I am very happy with my wife. She likes to compliment me from time to time..... Otherday she was telling me that I have the biggest cock among my friends.
An Irishman walks into a bar and orders three beers. The bartender gives him a strange look, but serves him his drinks. The Irishman takes them to a booth, clinks them together, and drinks them all. 

He then goes back to the bartender and orders another three beers, which he proceeds to drink in the same fashion.

On his third round, the bartender can't help but ask him "excuse me sir, I couldn't help but notice that your order your drinks in threes, if you don't mind telling me, I was wondering why that is"

The Irishman grins and says "Well, I just moved here from me hometown. When me and me two best mates split ways, we agreed that we'd always have a drink for each other when we went out, so that we always drink together." The bartender nods understandingly, and serves him his drinks.

The Irishman keeps up this routine, coming to the bar at least twice a week and ordering three drinks at a time.

One day the Irishman walks in, solemnly makes his way to bar, and orders two beers. The patrons and the bartender all see this, and they assume that something terrible has happened to one of his friends. However, they don't want to disturb him in his time of grief, so they refrain from asking him anything.

When he goes to order his second round, the bartender can't help but remark "I'm so sorry for your loss". The Irishman looks up and says "Me loss!? What in tarnation are ye talking aboot?"

The bartender says "Well when you bought two drinks, I assumed that one of your friends had passed"

The Irishman laughs and says "No, nothing of the sort. I quit drinking is all".
What is Donald Trump's least favorite state? New Mexico.
What did the Valley Girl say when she could only understand even numbers? I can't odd
Smokers go out in the cold for 10+ minutes a day and freeze their asses off in the winter and what do they do they get in return? Cancer.
"Shoveling snow is great exercise" \- Satan
Poor farmers Farmers are having an awful time at the moment in Ireland. No grants, no profit, just terrible.

John: "Well Tom how are things, how's the farming?"
Tom: "Bad John, I think I'm going to switch from milking cows to raising cocks"
John: "Why is that?"
Tom: "Well farmers need the cocks to breed with the hens so there will be a rake of money in it."
John: "How many cocks have you got?"
Tom: "Only the 3, come down to the haggard and I'll show you. One is normal, one is dyslexic and the other is gay."
Cock 1: "Cockle-Doodle-Doo!"
Cock 2: "Doodle-Doo-A-Cock!"
Cock 3: "Any-Cock'll-Doo!"
What do a pulse and an orgasm have in common? I don't care if she has either.
Have you heard the joke of the traveler? Wait until he arrives, then he will tell you.
Cultural Difference A man and his mail order bride, straight from China, are lying in bed when the man suddenly feels the urge to have sex.  
He looks at his wife and says "Our sex life is kind of boring, we should do something different."  
"Like what?" inquires his wife.  
"How about 69?" he replies.  
The wife ponders a moment and says "That different, yes, but why you want broccoli egg roll and shrimp-fried rice to have sex?"
Why is Tumblr bad for you? Because it contains too much Transfat. 
Norwegians in Minnesota One dark night outside a small town in Minnesota, a fire started inside the local chemical plant and in a blink of an eye it exploded into massive flames. The alarm went out to all the fire departments for miles around.
When the volunteer fire fighters appeared on the scene, the chemical company president rushed to the fire chief and said, "All our secret formulas are in the vault in the centre of the plant. They must be saved. I will give $50,000 to the fire department that brings them out intact."

But the roaring flames held the fire fighters off.

Soon more fire departments had to be called in as the situation became desperate. As the firemen arrived, the president shouted out that the offer was now $100,000 to the fire department that could bring out the company's secret files.

From the distance, a lone siren was heard as another fire truck came into sight. It was the nearby Norwegian rural township volunteer fire company composed mainly of Norwegians over the age of 65. To everyone's amazement, that little run-down fire engine roared right past all the large newer fire trucks that were parked around the plant.

Without even slowing down, the old truck drove straight into the middle of the inferno. Outside, the other fire
fighters watched as the Norwegian old timers jumped off right in the middle of the fire and fought it back on all sides. It was a performance and effort never seen before.

Within a short time, the Norske old timers had the fire well under control and had saved the secret formulas. The grateful chemical company president announced that for such a superhuman feat he was upping the reward to $200,000, and walked over to personally thank each of the brave fire fighters.

The local TV news reporter rushed in to capture the event on film, asking their chief, "What are you going to do with all that money?"

"Vell," said Ole Larsen, the 70-year-old fire chief, "Da first thing ve gonna do is fix da brakes on dat focking truck!"
Back in my day, we didn't have MTV... We had to smoke pot and watch the radio!
Pretty lady sits next to a man at a bar Man: You're beautiful. Your definitely going to get laid tonight! 

Lady: You're cocky. How do you know that? 

Man: Because I'm stronger than you. 
What do you call a Hispanic sniper? A Puerto-recon.
Bob and Jim walk into a bar "Hey Donkeyboy, get me a drink." The bartender gets him a drink.

Bob says, "Donkeyboy, get me another drink." The bartender gets him another drink.

Finally, Jim asks the bartender, "Why does he call you Donkeyboy?"

"I don't know. Hehaw-hehaw-he always calls me that."
What are the three greatest lies?         a)the check is in the mail
        b)small is beatiful
        c)I won't come in your mouth
A millennial moves house... Knock knock


Who dis? New door
I'm so racist, I would only date from the one true race... ...The human race 
I was going to push Donald Trump into a vat of wet cement but I decided not to... ...It would have really set a bad president.
What is the shittiest part of Object Oriented Programming? Reading the abbreviation backwards.
I booked a table for me and my girl... for valentines day. shes going to go mental she hates snooker 
I love to squeeze my girlfriend when she is on her period. She is like my little ketchup packet .
Dad Joke It was my birthday an me and my Dad were driving on the highway when we saw a terrible accident. My Dad said "This is the worst accident I've seen in 20years!" 

Well yeah it was my 20th birthday.
Adam was walking around the Garden of Eden feeling very lonely, so God asked Adam, "What is wrong with you?" Adam said, "Lord, I don't have anyone to talk to."

God said, "Then I will give you a companion, and she will be called a 'woman'. This person will cook for you and wash your clothes, she will always agree with every decision you make. She will bear your children and never ask you to get up in the middle of the night to take care of them. She will not nag you, and will always be the first to admit she was wrong when you've had a disagreement. She will never have a headache, and will freely give 'love' and compassion whenever needed. She will never question your behaviour or the company you keep. She will support you and understand that you have important decisions to make throughout your life and don't have time for nonsense..."

Adam asked God, "What will this woman cost?"

God said, "An arm and a leg..."

Adam said, "What can I get for just a rib?"
A museum curator obtains a valuable painting called "The Joke" The painting is put on exhibit, and to celebrate its arrival the museum throws a large party. Everyone there has an amazing time, and leaves very happy. The curator in all his excitement forgets to lock the museum. When he arrives at work the next day, he finds a terrifying sight. The painting is gone, with no trace to be found. He reports the theft, and the police come looking for it. After 4 days, the curator gets a call from the police with more information. "Have you found it?" he asked. The officer responded "No sir, I'm very sorry. We've looked everywhere but we can't find the joke."
The absolute value of zero. lol
A female gorilla is alone in a cage at a zoo... ... She has become very cranky due to her isolation and has become increasingly aggressive. Her problematic behavior has become a concern of the zookeeper who decides to try to fix it. While trying to come up with a solution he notices the janitor, a very sleazy redneck type and gets an idea. He walks over to him and asks:

"Would you be willing to.. perhaps have sex with a gorilla for 500 dollars?"

The janitor thinks about it for a while and agrees but on 3 conditions.

"First!" He says, "I don't want to have to kiss her. Understood?"

"Yes." Says the zookeeper.

"Second!" The janitor says, "I don't want anyone to know about this!"

"Alright" says the zookeeper, "And what's the third condition?"

"I'm going to need a little bit more time to come up with the 500 dollars."
The Oxy Tribe is an ancient tribe full of highly smart and intelligent people. So what do you call a stupid Oxy? An oxymoron
What does a cannibal call his girlfriend? Cutie pie
A horse walks into a bar... People begin to quickly, but calmly leave the bar as they realize the potential danger of the situation.
What was the highlight of the bulimic bachelor party? It was when the cake came out of the girl.
I won $100 on a radio competition this morning.  The DJ called me and said, “We are going live in a few seconds, I’m going to ask you what you’re going to spend your money on and I want you to tell the listeners on air.”
 “Okay” I replied.
 He said, “3…2….1….. Congratulations to Lefty, our competition winner, what are you going to spend the money on?”
I said, “I’m going to spend it on air.” 

5% of the time I make typing mistakes while messaging english speaking friends and 95% the German auto-correction will just.. Flicken es...
Donald Trump 'complained hand towels on Air Force One are not soft enough' After He Wiped His Ass With The Constitution
Knock. Knock. Who is there? Pizza delivery. Pizza delivery who?

Pizza Inn.

Pizza in whom?
What are 50 babies, each holding a gun, called? An infantry.
Did you hear about the clown on the loose in the textile factory? The manager was in stitches
I think I have OCD. I Think I Have OCD.

I think I have O.C.D.

I think I have O.C.D..
Travelling doctors are an interesting idea... ...but they don't work in practice.
Why was the chicken unrecognizable? It crossed too much
A woman walks into a voodoo market... She walks up to an old man selling cursed items where she proceeds to say "I would like to buy a magic mirror for my cheating boyfriend so he can break it and have 7 years of bad luck." The old man reaches into his drawer and pulls out a condom. He says "if he's cheating, then 7 years isn't enough. If he breaks this, he will get 18."
Over the last few weeks i've been collecting details about my life and adding them to spreadsheet on my computer. I've really exelled myself.
We used to have Reagan, Jonny Cash and Bob Hope Now we have Trump, no cash, and no hope. 
What do you call when a Programmer pukes at IHop? A Stack Overflow
Phone statistics in third world countries: Phone statistics in third world countries:


Boy to Boy          00:00:59

Boy to Mom        00:00:50

Boy to Dad          00:00:30

Boy to Girl           01:23:59

Girl to Girl            05:29:59

Girl to Boy            Missed call

Husband to Wife   00:00:03

Wife to Husband   14 Missed Calls
Vladimir Putin is banning Brazzers saying it's bad for the psyche. "Psyche".  Now I know how to say 'wrist' in Russian!
As a writer, I often correct grammar online and get called a Grammar Nazi because of it. I'm not a Grammar Nazi, okay? I'm just alt-literate.
I want to open a gym for people with fetishes. It's a great idea in theory, but I'm still trying to work out the kinks.
How to get free internet @ home I live in an apartment complex so I have neighbors left to right and below me. One day I asked my neighbor if he was interested in splitting the cost of my wifi 50/50 so he could also use it. He agreed. I went on to my other neighbor downstairs and asked him the same thing. Now both my neighbors are paying for my wifi.
Sieg Heil by Covergirl Girls use chemicals to remove polish and no one panics.
Hitler does the same thing and everyone loses their minds.
What do you call a greedy oyster? Shellfish.
I saw someone robbing a store and went to stop him. He hit me with a bag of golden coins. I guess you could say I had some cents knocked into me.
I like my coffee how I like my calculus expressions: Limitless.
I always carry a bomb around with me ... What is the likelihood of having two bombs in the same place at the same time?
My wife thinks I'm "selfish in the bedroom". She's the one that won't let me sleep.
Old People Always Poke Me Old people at wedding always poke me and say
You Are the Next
.
.
So, I Started Doing The Same Thing To Them At Funerals
I hate weeping willows. They're too sappy.
Sexy up skirt... 
As I knelt down with a pair of size 4 shoes in front of this sexy blonde in a short skirt, I couldn’t resist a quick glance at her panties.
“Hey perv!!” she said as she gave me a playful kick. “I bet the only reason you work here is to look up girls’ skirts isn’t it?”
 “That’s an absolutely ridiculous accusation, miss,” I said sternly. “I don’t fucking work here.” 
Jesus needs love too The night  before  he  was  arrested  and  crucified,  his  followers started to worry.

Christ was still a virgin; wouldn’t it be nice to have him experience a little bit of pleasure before he dies? 

So they asked Mary Magdalene to go to the tent where Christ  was  resting  and  seduce  him;  


Mary  said  she  would do it gladly and went in, but five minutes later, she ran out screaming, terrified and furious. The followers asked her what went wrong, and she explained: 

“I slowly undressed, spread my legs and showed Christ my pussy; he looked at it, said ‘What a terrible wound! It should be healed!’ and gently put his palm on it.”
A blonde took her son to a doctor.. A blonde took her son to a doctor: Doctor, I think my son swallowed a key! I'm so worried

Doctor: Calm down and tell me when did this happen?

Blonde: About a week ago.

Doctor: Why the hell didn't you bring him to me earlier?

Blonde: We had a spare but now that's also lost   
Paper or plastic? I went to buy condoms the other day. I asked the guy if he could double bag it for me. He just looked at me and said "You're gonna have to do that yourself buddy!"
What do you call a two dimensional shape that works out way too much? A Noneckagon
Two tennis players got into a shouting match. They made quite a racket.
How many nuns does it take to change a lightbulb? Nun.
My friend had his appendix removed and was out shooting with his other friends not a day later. Turns out cops don't like it when you try to kill them. Poor appendix didn't stand a chance.
Vladislav There was once a man named Vladislav. He worked an average job, received minimum wage, and was frustrated with his life. 
One day he received a call from his wife, who told him out of guilt that she had been cheating on him for several months now, and wanted to stop by the house to collect her belongings before she left him.
Upon reaching home, the wife saw Vlad sitting on a couch, staring at the wall. 

"Vladislav..." 

He looks at her and says with an unmoving expression:

"Baby, don't hurt me."
Why did the Super Bowl Champions refuse to meet Trump at the White House? Because they were Patriots.
Why does Betsy look so distracted Her husband devos her
During WW2 a British pilot is captured by the Germans and sent to a POW camp. While there he developes an infection in his leg and the camp doctor tells him that they have to amputate.

"I have a request," says the pilot, "could you please cremate the limb and sprinkle the ashes over my beloved home land the next time your boys do a flyover?"

"We can do that." says the doctor. He makes the arrangements and the ashes are delivered.

The pilot gets another infection, this time in his arm. The doctor tells him they need to amputate. 

"I have a request," says the pilot, "could you please cremate the limb and sprinkle the ashes over my beloved home land the next time your boys do a flyover?"

"We can do that." says the doctor. He makes the arrangements and the ashes are delivered

A few weeks go by and the pilot gets another infection, this time in his remaining leg. The doctor tells him that they need to amputate.

"I have a request," says the pilot, "could you please cremate the limb and sprinkle the ashes over my beloved home land-"

"STOP!" bellows a prison guard, "He's trying to escape!"

What's better than /r/jokes? the comments in /r/jokes
A pirate walks into a bar.. With a wheel on his crotch. The bar tender says 
"Aye, what's with the wheel?"

Pirate says "arrrrrghhhhhh, it be driving me nuts" 


How many bacteria does it take to change a lightbulb? One ... no, two ... no, four ... no, eight ...
A man walks into a barbershop and says, do you cut pubic hair? The Barber, a little taken back, says, "well, sure, why not?" 

The man bares his teeth and says, "Great. Can you get this one?"
I am annoyed that my wife came up with a girls name for my penis I don't even know who Ana Conda is!
Masturbating 
An 8-year-old choir boy catches the priest masturbating.

He said, "What are you doing father?"

"It's called masturbating," the priest replied. "You'll be doing this soon."

"Why father?" he asked.

"Because my wrist is killing me," the priest replied.
I saw an old school friend today and he started bragging about his well paid job, his flash expensive car and his enormous house.


Then he took a photo out of his wallet, showed it to me and said. "That's my wife, isn't she beautiful"?


I looked it at and said "If you think she's beautiful, you should see my wife"


He said "Why, is she a stunner?”


I said "No, she's a fucking optometrist!"

What do call an irrational fear of fake bees? A faux bee, aah!
Two tugboat captains have been friends for years. They would always cry, "Aye!" and blow their whistles whenever they passed each other. 

A new crewman asked his boat's mate, "What do they do that for?"

The mate looked surprised and replied, "You mean that you've never heard of ... an aye for an aye?"

*Knock knock*-forever *Knock knock*

Who's there?

..Deja

Deja who?

*Knock knock*

Who's there?

..Deja

Deja who?

*Knock knock*

Who's there?

..Deja

Deja who?

*Knock knock*

Who's there?

..Deja

Deja who?

*knock knock*

What's blue and not very heavy? Light blue.
Who's to coolest member of staff in the hospital? The ultrasound guy. 

And then who takes the title when he goes on holiday?

The hip replacement man. 
What do you call a bad joke? POTUS
Did you hear about the guy who couldn't pay for his exorcism? He got repossessed.
I have a dig bick You that read wrong 
You read that wrong too
Two Teenage Boys Were Arrested For Doing Drugs When they went to court, the judge said that he would like to give them a second chance if they could work in the community and convince young people not to do drugs they would avoid jail time. The two boys went to the community and did their work and returned to court the following month.

The judge asked the first boy how he did and he told the judge that he convinced 30 people not to do drugs.

The judge said, "That was great how did you do that?"

The Boy told him, "I used a diagram, your honor. I drew two circles like this: O o and told them this (the big circle) is your brain before drugs and this (small circle) is your brain after drugs."

"That's admirable," said the judge. "And you, how did you do?" (to the 2nd boy)

"Well, your honor, I persuaded 156 people to give up drugs forever."

"156 people! That's amazing! How did you manage to do that!"

"Well, I used the same two circles. I pointed to the small circle and told them, 'This is your asshole before prison..."
What's im season at the White House Peach
What do you call a dog with no hind legs and balls of steel? Sparky...
A young married couple decides to join a church... They attend a few introductory classes and meet with the pastor, who will decide whether they'll be approved for membership.

The pastor says, "Well, as you may have heard, we take fasting pretty seriously here. And Lent is just around the corner. I'd like to ask you to do something that may seem strange, but it will really demonstrate that you're committed to this church and to our spiritual disciplines. I'd like you to give up all sexual contact with each other for the entire 40 days of Lent."

The husband swallows hard. The wife audibly gasps. But they look at each other, and then to the pastor. The husband says, "Okay. We'll give it a shot."

A week into Lent, they show up at the pastor's office looking a bit shamefaced. The pastor welcomes them in, and they can't seem to make eye contact. He knows it's gone wrong and he folds his hands, leans forward and says, "Tell me what happened."

The young husband blurted out, "We tried! We really tried. But the second day of Lent was our anniversary. We went out to dinner, had a bottle of wine, and when we got home, things just started to go, you know. Down a certain path." The wife said, "But nothing happened — we danced and kissed briefly and then I made him sleep on the couch."

"The next night," the husband explained, "We talked about it, and both felt pretty guilty. But as the evening wore on, I could tell that both of us were really wanting that physical intimacy. So I actually went to a friend's house and slept at his place."

"Go on," said the pastor.

The husband said, "And then yesterday evening, she was reaching up to grab a can of peas from the top shelf and, well, she just looked so beautiful — I mean, that's good, right? She's my wife! I'm supposed to find her arousing. She looked so good, I grabbed her, we kissed, and then we ripped off all of our clothes and had wild, passionate, loud, messy sex right there on the floor."

The pastor stood up, shook his head in disgust and said with considerable exasperation as he motioned toward the door, "I'm sorry. But you are no longer welcome here at this church."

They got up to leave and the wife said, "That's okay. We're not welcome at Kroger anymore either."

What makes Jeff such a bad boy Racist sessions
What do you call a really smart dinosaur? A Professaur. 
I hate breakups. Especially when they try to let you down gently. 
"It's not you, it's me" "I just need some space"  "We can still be cousins". 
I learned a few things today. 1. I'm gonna be a dad! 
2. I'm gonna be an uncle! 
3. My sisters not on the pill. 
He likes to bury coal He's a deepholeable
Police in London have found a bomb outside a mosque. 
They've told the public not to panic as they've managed to push it inside.
Instead of The sandy Hook students recieving books... They got Magazines instead.
A woman was telling her friend , "I helped my husband become a millionaire." "And what was he before you married him?" 

"A billionaire."
DNA Test :) Dad: What’s ur Result?

Son: I’ve failed in 5 subjects.

Dad: From now Onwards Don’t Call Me “DAD”.

Son: Oh Come On Dad! 
Its my School Test Not a DNA Test.. :-D
My wife says I never listen. I can prove she's wrong. That's because she never says anything
A Redditor posted ten wordplay jokes hoping one would get to the front page... No pun in ten did.
In Soviet Russia, an American spy tries to blend in... George Keats had trained 20 years for this moment. He had mastered the Russian language in its native accent. He learned all of Russia's customs and social graces. He memorized Moscow streetmaps and knew every back-alley there was. He swore that he could even think like a Russian.

The big day finally came, and he was parachuted to the outskirts of Moscow at night. He emerged by daybreak, and hopped onto a bus going to the city center.

*"Comrade. How much for a ticket to Red square?",* he asked the conductor in authentic Russian.

*"5 Rubles, Comrade American"*, came the reply.

Keats was stunned. Perhaps the conductor was just being a smart-ass. He hopped off the bus and asked a passerby for directions to the closest bar.

*"It's just around the block, Comrade American."*

Keats' doubts grew immensely. Not knowing what to do, he went inside the bar and ordered a glass of Vodka.

*"Want some Borscht to go with it, Comrade American?",* the bartender asked.

Keats threw a fit. *"What's the matter with you people? I dress just like you, I speak just like you, I even THINK just like you! Why does everyone keep calling me American?"*

*"Well Comrade, it's because you're black."*
- Doctor, I want to live very old - Do you drink?  
- Never, only water.  
- You smoke?  
- Oh no, my body is a temple  
- Do you have crazy nights out dancing while doing cocaine and coming back home to have unprotected sex with multiple partners?  
- Never, I'm single and abstinent.  
- I see. So could you explain me exactly why you want to live old?
Jack and his llama walked into a bar... They ordered a drink and had a good time.
Why did the praying mantis cannibalize her boyfriend He refused to eat her
Have you heard about the new emo pizza? It cuts itself
Why do fascists hate snowflakes? Because of Stalingrad flashbacks
Who is the most poetic videogame character? Sonnet the Hedgehog
I already got a date this valentine's day. Her name is Emma, Emma Gination.
What kind of prize do you give someone who hasn't moved a muscle in over a year? A trophy.
What are the three rings of marriage? The engagement ring, the wedding ring and the suffering.
Thyme is actually the most medicinal herb it heals all wounds
What did the Syrian say about the airline food? He'd say it was awful if he could get on the plane. 
No Sex Tonight! I've never quite figured out why the sexual urges of men and women differ so much.

And I never have figured out the whole Venus and Mars thing or why men think with their head and women with their heart.

For example… One evening last week, my wife and I were getting into bed.

Well, the passion started to heat up, but then she said "I don't feel like it, I just want you to hold me."

I said "WHAT??!! What was that?!"

So she said the words that every husband on the planet dreads to hear..."You're just not in touch with my emotional needs as a woman enough for me to satisfy your physical needs as a man."

She responded to my puzzled look by saying, "Can't you just love me for who I am and not what I do for you in the bedroom?"

Realizing that nothing was going to happen that night, I went to sleep.

The very next day, I opted to take the day off of work to spend time with her. We went out to a nice lunch and then went shopping at a big, high-end department store. I walked around with her while she tried on several very expensive outfits. She couldn't decide which one to take so I told her we'd just buy them all. She wanted new shoes to compliment her new clothes, so I said lets get a pair for each outfit. We went on to the jewellery department where she picked out a pair of diamond earrings.

Let me tell you...she was so excited. She must have thought I was one wave short of a tsunami. I started to think she was testing me because she asked for a tennis bracelet when she doesn't even know how to play tennis. But, I think I threw her for a loop when I said, "That's fine, honey."

She appeared to be almost nearing sexual satisfaction from all of the excitement. Smiling with excited anticipation she finally said, "I think this is all dear; let's go to the cashier."

I could hardly contain myself when I blurted out, "No honey, I don't feel like it."

Her face just went completely blank as her jaw dropped with a baffled, "WHAT?"

I then said "Honey, I just want you to HOLD this stuff for a while.

You're just not in touch with my financial means as a man, enough for me to satisfy your shopping needs as a woman."

And just when she had this look like she was going to kill me, I added, "Why can't you just love me for who I am and not for the things I buy you?"

Apparently, no sex tonight either!



Edit: Didn't expect to make front page but glad lots of you got a laugh out of it!

Edit 2: Thank you for the gold! 
Did you guys hear about striking women? I think it's dreadful, nobody should be striking women.
Working holiday A husband comes home to find his wife with her suitcases packed in the living room. 

"Where are you going?" he asks. 

"I'm going to Las Vegas. I can earn $200 for a blow job there, and I figured that I might as well earn money for what I do for you for free." 

The husband thinks for a moment, goes upstairs, and comes back down, with his suitcase packed as well. 

"Where are you going?" the wife asks. 

"I'm coming with you. I want to see how you can live on $200 a year."
I love open-minded people. Like JFK and Kurt Cobain.
Who came first. The chicken or the egg A very embarrassed rooster 
My mom told me some bad news today... She said her joints are getting weaker, so I told her to roll them tighter.
A family had two boys and a girl named Anne... the brothers shared a common Anne sister.
A guy walks into a bar... ...and tells the bartender "Give me anything but a Budweiser." So the bartender hands him a beer, the man drinks it, and leaves.

Next day, man comes in and says "Give me anything but a Budweiser." Bartender gives him a beer, the man drinks it, and leaves.

Next day, he comes back with the same request. The bartender is obviously very curious at this points. So he asks "What is the problem with Budweiser?"

The man answers "Well, I once drank 20 Budweisers, went home, and blew chunks."

The bartender laughs and says "That would happen to anyone after drinking 20 of any beer."

The man looks around sheepishly and whispers "Chunks is my dog's name."
Top tip: buying heroin? Get some extra for later. It's a bit more-ish.
Balding grizzles pass their genes to their offspring or... Bare bears bear bare bears.
What is the difference between a Jew and a pizza? The pizza doesn’t scream when you throw it in the oven.


This joke is good not because of any inherent humor, but rather because of its failure to amuse. It serves, therefore, as a valuable cautionary tale.

The first flaw in the anecdote’s construction is in its gratuitous use of ethnicity as a crutch. To be sure, Jews serve as an invaluable comedy resource. Any joke involving miserliness of any kind can be improved by the addition of a Hebraic surname (or, in the alternative, by the addition of the prefix “Mac.”) But here, “Jewishness” does not improve the comedy one wit. Any ethnicity will scream when placed in an oven. You throw an Irishman into an oven, and see if he doesn’t cry out “Begosh and begorrah, I’ve been thrown into an oven!” So too the Mexican, whose refrain of “Ai yi yi, es mui caliente!” is equally plausible. Indeed, the only person who should ever be thrown into an oven in comedy is Sylvia Plath.

Many of you may object, “But what of the Holocaust? Surely that validates the choice of ‘Jew’ in the set-up?”

Far from it. One must be very careful when relying on history as validation. The Nazis threw very few screaming Jews into the oven. This is not Holocaust revisionism, it’s simply fact. The Germans are a very efficient people, and they killed almost all their victims before disposing of their bodies in factory-like furnaces. To do otherwise would slow their production lines of death down, and that would be intolerable to the German psyche. No, no. The corpses that were thrown into the ovens went in not unlike the aforementioned pizza – silently.

Thus, the fundamental logic of the joke is ruined. The difference does not hold up under historical scrutiny. 

So when you are asked to contemplate the difference between a Jew and a pizza, plausible answer is: “One is a human being with a human soul and a human mind and inherent human dignity, and the other is a molded dough product.” Or “You take the pizza out of the oven in one piece.”


Only every guy gets this..... Morning Wood
Why does Dr Pepper come in cans? Because his wife left him.
Why did the bee order a cup of coffee? For a quick buzz
Why can't the pony yell? His voice is too horse.
At St. Peter's Catholic Church in Toronto , they have weekly husband's marriage seminars. At the session last week, the priest asked Giuseppe, who said he was approaching his 50th wedding anniversary, to take a few minutes and share some insight into how he had managed to stay married to the same woman all these years.

Giuseppe replied to the assembled husbands, "Wella, I'va tried to treat her nicea, spenda da money on her, but besta of all is, I tooka her to Italy for the 25th anniversary!"

The priest responded, "Giuseppe, you are an amazing inspiration to all the husbands here! Please tell us what you are planning for your wife for your 50th anniversary?"

Giuseppe proudly replied, " I gonna go pick her up."
"Hey girl look me in the eyes" "Mmmmmno"

"Why not"

"I have a boyfriend. In fact I shouldn't be here sucking your dick"
Only pre-2017 kids will get this A decent public education 
Don't sleep with any girl... Don't sleep with any girl that can spell gonorrhea correctly, without looking it up.
Person 1 to person 2: whats up my brother from another mother Person 2: aren't we siblings?
Person 1: yeah sorry you're adopted
Why are lawyers buried deeper than regular people? Because deep down, they're really nice guys.
What's the least heavy kind of energy? Light Energy
A guy came into my shoe shop today He said, "I'd like a pair of red shoes please."  

"Certainly sir," I replied. "What size?"  

"Size 40."  

Fucking clown.
Thanks to World War I There are now more airplanes in the ocean than their are submarines in the sky.
If your life is awful, get a rope and a stool ...and find the next tree. Throw the rope over a branch and attach the stool to the rope.  

Now you've got a swing.
Why does Nancy suck at foot races? Her boots are made for walking
A 3 year old boy sits next to a pregnant women Boy: Why do you look so fat?

Woman: because i have a baby inside

Boy: is it a good baby?

Woman: yes it's a very good baby

Boy: then why'd you eat it?




I know this is an old joke heard it a while ago and told some of my friend and they never heard it so thought you might enjoy it aswell.

No need to upvote as i didnt make it
Fancy Dress There's this man with a bald head and a wooden leg who gets invited to a 
fancy dress party. He doesn't know what costume to wear to hide his head 
and is leg so he emails to a fancy dress company to explain the problem.  

A few days later he receives a parcel with a note that says: "Dear Sir, please find
enclosed a pirates outfit. The spotted handkerchief will cover your bald 
head and with your wooden leg you will be just right as a pirate".  

The man thinks this is terrible because they have just emphasized his 
wooden leg and so he writes a really rude email to complain. A week 
passes and he receives another parcel and a note which says:

"Dear Sir, sorry about before, please find enclosed a monks habit. The long robe 
will cover your wooden leg and with your bald head you will really look the part".  

Now the man is really annoyed since they have gone from emphasizing his
wooden leg to emphasizing his bald head and he writes the company an
EXTREMELY rude email to complain.  

The next day he receives a small parcel and a note which reads 
"Dear Sir, please find enclosed a tin of molasses. Pour the tin of molasses over your
bald head, stick your wooden leg up your ass and go as a toffee apple".  
How many mice does it take to screw in a lightbulb? 2, but nobody knows how they got in there
Someone stole my pencil case off my desk and ran with it I guess it's no longer stationery 
I love discussing religion with the cashier at the supermarket Because the customer is always right
Stephen Hawking is a very paranoid man He's always looking over his shoulder.
What did the high Australian scientist say to his partner Stoichi while holding a broccoli? "Oy Stoichi oy'ma tree! Pretty cool huh?" 
I asked my wife what she wanted for Valentine's Day and she said 'treat me like a princess!' I'm having her killed in a traffic accident in Paris.
My doctor gave me 4 weeks to live He said he'll shoot me if I still can't pay his bill.
Yesterday someone knocked on my door. When I opened it I was surprised to see Bill Gates standing on my front porch.

"Have you accepted the Microsoft Terms and Conditions into your heart?" he asked.

Apparently he's joined the Windows Witnesses.
What's the difference between the Catholic Church and Pimples... Pimples don't come on your face until you turn 10
What do you call a millionaire in the white house? A public offender 
Why are Catholics so anti-abortion? Because if women stop having kids, who are the priests going to rape?
The Catholic church and sexual abuse... Is a pretty touchy subject if you ask me.
Not everyone may think digging tunnels is exciting Some may even call it boring
How to reclose an opened bottle of champagne? I don't know, ask Falcons fans.
A female blond police officer pulls over another blond female driver.. Blond police officer: "Can I see your license and registration?"
Driver: "What's a license?"
Police officer: "It's a thing in your purse with your picture on it."
Driver: *Fumbles through purse and finds her reflection on a mirror and hands it to the officer*
Police officer: *looks in mirror and sees own reflection and hands the mirror back the driver*
Police officer: "I'm so sorry for pulling you over, I didn't know you were a fellow officer, have a great day" *Walks away*
Did you ever notice that No 2 pencils look alike? It's true
Why are there no "B" batteries? You would never be able to ask for them without sounding like you have a stutter.
 "B-Batteries please"
A man loses his wife to cancer. Frustrated and depressed, he goes to sleep for the night. We wakes up with a massive erection.


Guess you could say he had mourning wood.
What do you call a black man on the moon? An astronaut.
A mirror, a condom and a grain of salt walk into a bar. The grain of salt looks at the mirror and tells him "if e
I spill you get 1 year of bad luck", the mirror responds "Well, if I break you get 7 years of bad luck", then the condom interrupts and says "Well, if I break then you'll have bad luck for the rest of your days".
Prism What does a prism make when it doesn't like something?

A disdainbow.

What does it make when it wants to fight?

A painbow

What does it make when it can't walk?

A canebow

...when it needs to get somewhere quickly?

A trainbow

...when it really, REALLY needs to get somewhere quickly?

A planebow

...when it can only make one color?

A plainbow

...when it's a smart prism?

A brainbow

...when it's baking bread?

A grainbow

...when it's building something?

A cranebow

...when it needs to hold on to something?

A containbow

...when the Joker is attacking Gotham City?

A Bruce Waynebow

...when its name is Tarzan?

A Janebow

...when it's the King of Prisms?

A reignbow

...when it's poisoned?

A banebow

...when it's inside a blood vessel?

A veinbow

...when it belongs to a wizard?

An arcanebow
Where did Sally go after the bombing? Everywhere
The Trump cabinet is truly diverse. I counted at least 3 different shades of white in it. 
What's worse than a satellite around Saturn? A probe in Uranus.
My neighbors listen to great music. Whether they like it or not.
If you bring back Australian gold from an alternate universe. You have AU AU Au.
I was walking late at night. And saw three strong men beating an old lady, i got into the fight ...

And we almost kill the bitch.


student loans... that's it, that's the joke.

It takes like 1000 years to pay off your debt. Longer than it took you to earn your degree.
What was the first thing Adam said to Eve ? "Stand back .... I don't know how big this thing is going to grow!"

Why did everyone pass the final confectioner exam? It was a piece of cake 
Friends are like peeing in your pants... Everyone can see it, but only you can feel its warmth.
A nerve impulse... A nerve impulse is caused when a stimulus changes the membrane potential of a neuron and opens voltage-gated sodium channels. This sodiums flows into the neuron and down the axon to the next synapse. So every nerve impuse, everything we experience and every move we make, comes from sodium ions in our cells... No wonder people are so damn salty about everything!
Why are suicidal people so good at doing laundry. Because they're good at hanging things.
What do you call an empty bottle of Cheese Whiz? Cheese Was.
What did the German sausage say to the French bread? Gluten tag!
We all know a Mexican standoff and a Canadian standoff So an American standoff is when two people are flipping each other off but you know nothing's going to happen.
Two men go bear hunting. The first man asks, "Have you ever hunted bear before?"

The second man replies, "No, but I've been fishing in shorts."
Why does Dr. Pepper come in bottles? Because he's a fuckin' creep.
A Russian alcoholic loses the key to car... His wife wakes him from his drunken slumber. 

"Where are the keys to the car!?" she demands. 

"Vodka? Whiskey?" he replies. 

(read with Russian accent)
My mom has this really weird fetish. She liked dressing up as herself all the time and then acting like a total fucking bitch
I no longer saw the point in swordfighting.... I no longer saw the point in swordfighting after it blinded both my eyes.
How do you get a dog to stop humping your leg? Pick it up and suck its dick 
A priest and a rabbi are at a wedding... the priest sees an altar boy, and says, "man I'd really like to screw him." The rabbi responds by saying, "out of what?"
What city has the most people eating waffles on the beach? San Diego
Two muffins are baking in an oven. One muffin says to the other "Man, it's hot in here!"

The other muffin says "HOLY SHIT, A TALKING MUFFIN?!?!"
How many programmers does it take to change a light bulb? None. It’s a hardware problem.
Waiting at the bus station “Excuse me, sir, have you seen a police officer around?”

“No, not a soul, actually.”

“Very good, now give me your wallet, watch and laptop!”

My teacher told me if I slept with her I'd get an A for the semester. I love being homeschooled
Getting pulled over Police officer to a driver: “OK, driver’s license, vehicle license, first aid kit and warning triangle.”
 
Driver: “Nah, I’ve already got all that. But how much for that funny Captain’s cap?“ 


I used to buy my ex chocolate all the time She was such a bitch, I hoped it would kill her
How do you make a pound of fat look good? Put a nipple on it
Have you heard about the magic dildo? One day a business man had to go on a long trip for work and decided that before his trip he would buy a "special present" for his wife while he was away. 

On his way home, the man went to an adult store and asked the worker if their were any new items that would keep his wife busy while he was away. 

The worker pointed to the latest and greatest "magic dildo". He told the business man "all you need to do is tell it where you want it to go and it will magically go there". 

The business man couldn't believe it so the worker said "magic dildo to the door!" The dildo jumped out of its box and flew to the door. The business man was so excited that he bought a boxed dildo right then and there. 

When he got home he was so excited and told his wife about the new present he bought her. She didn't love the idea but a few days later she was feeling lonely and pulled out the box to her magic dildo. 

She said "magic dildo to my vagina!" The dildo jumped out of the box and started pleasuring her. After finishing the wife tried pulling the dildo out but it wouldn't budge. 

She got really worried and her calls wouldn't go through to her husband so, she started driving to the hospital. On her way the dildo continued pleasuring her and with each orgasm she swerved her car. 

Soon after swerving, a cop pulled her over and asked why she was swerving. She told the cop the whole story about the magic dildo and how she couldn't get it out of her. 

The cop laughed and said "magic dildo my ass!"
The red man lives in the red house, the orange man lives in the orange house, and the yellow man lives in the yellow house. Who lives in the white house? Also the orange man.
A Newlywed Couple A newlywed couple moves into their new house. One day the husband comes home from work and his wife says, "Honey, you know, in the upstairs bathroom one of the pipes is leaking, could you fix it?" The husband says, "What do I look like, Mr. Plumber?" 

A few days go by, and he comes home from work and his wife says, "Honey, the car won't start. I think it needs a new battery. Could you change it for me?" He says: "What do I look like, Mr. Goodwrench?" 

Another few days go by, and it's raining pretty hard. The wife finds a leak in the roof. She says, "Honey, there's a leak on the roof! Can you please fix it?" He says, "What do I look like, Bob Vila?" 

The next day the husband comes home, and the roof is fixed. So is the plumbing and the car. He asks his wife what happened. "Oh, I had a handyman come in and fix them," she says. "Great! How much is that going to cost me?" he snarls. Wife says: "Nothing." He said he'd do it for free if I either baked him a cake or slept with him."

"Uh, well, what kind of cake did you make?" asks the husband. 

"What do I look like," she says, "Betty Crocker?"
Republicans are the true snowflakes... they're white, they're cold, and if you put enough of em together they'll shut down public schools

EDIT* Thanks for the gold! You popped my gold cherry! 

its a joke folks. just a joke.
An android phone and an iPhone meet after a year. **iPhone**: What......the......fuck.....dude? You.....are.....infested.....with.....malware!!  
**Android Phone**: Fuckers don't update me. But what happened to you? Why are speaking with a lag?  
**iPhone**: Fuckers.....updated......me.
2100s kids won't get this Jobs
(Robots will take them all)
A blind man walks into a bar... and a table... and a chair.
A Buddhist Monk walks up to a hotdog stand. "make me one with everything"
My ex and I didn't work out because of our birth signs I'm a cancer she was a cunt, her Pisces smelled like a Taurus and she was anything but a Virgo
They say you are what you eat That explains why I'm such a pussy
4 sons Four guys are at a high school reunion and one of them goes to the restroom.
The other three guys start talking about how succesful their sons are.
Guy 1: My son is so successful he owns a cardealership and just gave his best friend a Ferarri.
Guy 2: Thats nothing, my son owns an airliner and just gave his best friend a private jet
Guy 3: Well my son is more success than that, he owns an architecture firm and just gave his best friend a castle
Guy 4 walks out of the bathroom and walks over to the other 3 guys
Guy 4: Hey guys what are we talking about
Guy 1: Oh, we are talking about how successful our sons are
Guy 4:Well, my son is a Gay stripper
Guy 2: You must be so dissappointed with what he's done with his life
Guy 4: Actually, he is doing very well for himself. He just got a Ferrari, a jet, and a castle from his three boyfriends.
Android users won't get this. Update.
A thief in a bank. With a mass of debts and a starving family, the thief made his way through the bank. The thief never doubted his abilities. Ever heard of the twenty thousand dollars stolen from the Federal Reserve? Exactly. As he scurried around the halls looking for the vault, he thought of his former home ablaze in what can’t be called an accident. The thought of the multitude of dollars and coins in the vault pushed him as he attempted to navigate the seemingly repeating halls. Making way down stair case after case after case, an unmarked floor seemed to be the gates to a promised land. The legal tender would be his for the taking. Thousands of pieces of paper containing green ink and a sense of empowerment. As he trampled the seldom touched tile floor, he began to think of all the opportunities the stolen cash would bring him. He got closer to the unmarked door that contained the vault. Closer still. Again. The simple wooden door was no obstacle. He crept right through. A heavenly glow of fluorescent lamps convinced him what he was doing was right. Moments later, there it was. The bronze vault door. A steel circle, weighing around 22 tons, would be the only challenge. He was getting closer. The thoughts of money were coursing through his

A security guard noticed the theft. The only thought that went through the guard’s mind was “hmm, a cockroach. I had better squash it.”
What is software engineering? It is a bad joke.
What do you call a nurse working on a pirate ship? An Arrrrr - N
What do you call a dog with no legs? I really doesn't matter he's not gonna come. 
Windows 10 users won't get this. Privacy. 
Did you guys hear about identity theft? Sharon is Karen!
Did you hear about the two tornados in Las Vegas? They decided to elope after a whirlwind romance!
A Beggar To A Rich Person A beggar to a rich person: Sir please give me 10$, i have to drink tea

Rich: But you can drink tea only in 5$

Beggar: Sir, my girl friend will drink tea too

Rich: Oh, wow a beggar made a girl friend...

Beggar: No Sir, Girl friend made me a beggar 
(few days ago i was the honor of this hotel) 
What did mummy tower say to the baby tower Here comes the aeroplane!
Trump did a better job getting people to exercise in 1 month than Michelle Obama did in 8 years Look at all those protesters on the streets!
Why can't French people count to 5? There's a tree in the way. 
Why are vegetables so hard to eat sometimes? The wheelchairs 
A man walks into a bar waving his gun around A man walks into the bar waving his gun around yelling, "I have 45 calibre Colt 1911 with a seven round magazine plus one in the chamber and I want to know who's been sleeping with my wife!" A voice from the back of the room called out, "You're gonna need more ammo!"
Where did Muhammad go after the bombing? Everywhere
I destroy every string instrument I find... As a part of my vow of non-violins.
Doctor! I think I have a concussion! Doctor: "Dont worry, Its all in your head"
Why doesn't anyone hear psychiatrists in the bathroom? The p is silent.
What did the pistachio say to the peanut? Who wants to eat something that starts with P and ends with NUTs?
Who designed bathtubs? Seriously, I haven't been able to fully sit comfortably submerged in a bath tub since I was 11.
What did the Spanish Optometrist say to his Patient? Si?
What do you call the useless piece of skin on a dick? The man. 
Women keep telling me to "stop itemizing them" Then they go and call me a dickhead 
Only 2010's kids will get this... Measles
Where do you find a dog with no legs? Right where you left him!


I'll leave.
What happened to the cheerleader when she did the splits? 20 class rings fell out.
10 Inch Bic Two Men were out fishing when one decides to have a smoke 
He asks the other guy if he has a lighter 
He replies "Yes I do!" and hands the other a 10 inch long cigarette lighter 
Surprised the guy asks "Where did you get this?" The guy replies "Oh I have a personal genie." 
The first man asks "Can I make a wish? " 
Sure says the other man "Just make sure that you speak clearly cause he is a little hard of hearing" "Ok I will" says the other as he rubs the lamp a genie appears and asks the man what he wants The man says " I want a Million Bucks " 
The genie says OK and goes back to his bottle and 10 seconds later a million ducks fly over head And the guy says to the other " 
Your genie realy sucks at hearing doesnt he?" 

The other man replies

 "I know, do you really think I asked for a 10 inch BIC?"
I accidentally spilled spot remover on my dog. It scared the shit out of him and now I need some for my carpet :(
"Hey, I heard somebody called you an owl today." Who?
Only vaccinated kids will get this... Autism.
What's the difference between a 2017 Tesla and 50 dead babies? I don't have a 2017 Tesla in my garage.
What's the difference between E.T. and an illegal immigrant? E.T. learned the language, and eventually went home.
I noticed something about the letter "B" Sometimes it makes subtle appearances
What do you call a team-up between a maniac, a random white guy, and the head of the Vatican? Snapped, Cracker and Pope
How does a reptile climb a mountain? It scales it
A physicist goes into an ice-cream parlour every week He always orders an ice cream sundae and offers one to the empty stool next to him. One day the owner of the shop asks the physicist, "Why do you do that?" The physicist replies, "Well, quantum mechanics teaches us that there is a chance that the matter above this stool will spontaneously transform into a beautiful woman who will accept my offer of an ice cream and fall in love with me." The owner says, "We have beautiful women come in here all the time. Why don't you offer one of them an ice cream and maybe she'll fall in love with you." And the physicist replies, "Yeah, right! What are the odds of THAT happening?"
How many psychiatrists does it take to change a lightbulb? Only 1, but the lightbulb has to be willing to change
What's the difference between in-laws and outlaws? Outlaws are wanted
Only gay men from the 1980s will get this... The gradual acceptance into society.

What did you think I was going to say, you sick fucks.
A man walks into a bar One man says, "give me some h2o"
A second man walks in and says, "give me some h2o too"

The second man dies.
An elderly lady phoned her telephone company... An elderly lady phoned her telephone company to report that her telephone failed to ring when her friends called - and that on the few occasions when it did ring, her pet dog always moaned right before the phone rang. The telephone repairman proceeded to the scene, curious to see this psychic dog or senile elderly lady.
He climbed a nearby telephone pole, hooked in his test set, and dialed the subscriber's house. The phone didn't ring right away, but then the dog moaned loudly and the telephone began to ring.
Climbing down from the pole, the telephone repairman found:
1. The dog was tied to the telephone system's ground wire via a steel chain and collar. 
2. The wire connection to the ground rod was loose.
3. The dog was receiving 90 volts of signaling current when the phone number was called.
4. After a couple of such jolts, the dog would start moaning and then urinate on himself and the ground.
5. The wet ground would complete the circuit, thus causing the phone to ring.
Which demonstrates that some problems CAN be fixed by pissing and moaning.
Why was the snowman so upset? Because somebody had stolen his nose and the police didn't carrot all!
Why can't Helen Keller drive? Because she's a woman
What's a caterpillar afraid of? A dogapillar 
What do you say to a Mexican guy in a vegetative state? Coma estas?
What do you call a French man wearing sandals? Phil-lip Phil-lop. 
What did JayZ call Beyonce before they got married? Feyonce
I was supposed to be filming a porno but I was late to the set. The cameraman phoned me up and said, "Will you be long?"

I said, "Yes, around 9 inches."
Why California hates Donald Trump? Because life in California is like GTA (Grand Theft Auto).
The doctor says i have myopic attendance syndrome I can't see myself coming in to work today.
If the Earl of Lemongrab had hair... ...do you think he'd use an acceptable conditioner to keep it soft?
What do you call a rabbit with fleas Bugs bunny
How do you eat your Reese's? Witherspoon
I had to quit my job as a pool cleaner... It was too draining. 
The last time I was someone's type, I was donating blood. 
I want to be like Leonardo DiCaprio from Inception. He has a dream job. 
My friend is blind, you know what that means... he can't see.
My belt was looking a bit worn so I bought a new one.. I hope it holds up.
The Trump administration has chosen the next movie to screen after 'Finding Dory'. True Lies.

Why is a Jewish canoe the safest boat to be in? It never tips!

Bonus:
How do you pick up a Jewish girl?
With a dustpan and a broom.
Only 00's Kids Will Get This Jesus Christ.
A guy meets a girl at the club and takes her home. Before going to his place the girl tells him that she can tell how a man is in bed by the way he opens the door. She tells him, "If a man struggles with the key then that means he is a sloppy lover and he is not the right one for me." 

The guy then stops, looks at his keys, then stares at the door. After a while of staring, he goes toward the doorknob and before inserting the key he licks the keyhole. 
Made me laugh more than I should have! What do you call an alligator wearing a vest?!



An investigator. 
What do you call an Apple update you don't see coming? An iPatch... I'm sorry...
What did the little Ethiopian boy get for his 4th birthday? Flowers.
I followed Dwayne Johnson for an hour and when he wasn't looking I slapped his arse. He turned around and punched me in the face. That's what happens when you hit rock bottom. 
Why do divers fall off the boat backwards?? Cuz if they fell forward they wud still be in the boat
What's the opposite of irony? Wrinkly. 
A man walks into a bar and takes a seat. He later gets arrested for petty theft.
A German tank commander boasted "One Tiger can take on ten Shermans!" And an American replied "Good thing we have eleven."
There are three men on a boat with a pack of cigarettes and no matches. How did they manage to smoke? They threw a cigarette overboard, and made the boat a cigarette lighter
Trump keeps calling CNN "fake" news because... it's consistent with what Melania keeps telling him are "real" orgasms.
What do you call a fat girl with a rape whistle? Optimistic.
What do you call a Japanese man in America with $8932 and 40 cents? A Mill*yen*aire.

...Yeah I know I'm a shitbird.

What do Donald Trump and the iPhone 7 have in common? They both think de-porting is the answer when there’s no more Jobs.
Why do girls like the Falcons? Because they like chokers!
Jobs that dont exist anymore... Steve
Why did the Sultan leave his job at Mattress City? He was already a manager at Ottoman Empire
What's a neologasm? It's a really good neologism.
Ronaldo hits his head and is injured. Manager shouts 'support his head' quick! The fans chant 'Ronaldo's head! Ronaldo's head!'

Manager shouts 'Call him an ambulance!'

The fans chant 'Ronaldo's an ambulance! Ronaldo's an ambulance!'
A Pair of Slippers and A Dildo Two guys are sitting around talking about what they got their wives for Valentines Day

Todd : "So, what did you get your wife for Valentines day?"

Mark : "I got her this BEAUTIFUL diamond ring. She shows this thing off wherever she goes. She wears it to the store, out to get the mail, to the gas station, etc. She loves it man. What about you?"

Todd : "Well, I got my wife a pair of slippers and a dildo..."

Mark : "What the fuck? That's rather odd for Valentines day don't ya think?"

Todd : "Actually, it makes perfect sense. If she doesn't like the slippers, then she can go fuck herself"


I am awesome at Russian Roulette. I've NEVER lost!
What happened to the frog parked in a handicap spot? He go toad.
The first rule of The Liars Club: Tell everybody you're in the Fight Club
How does Harry Potter like to go down hills? Walking



j.k.  ...rowling
Two inmates are caught having sex A senior and junior corrections officer are on patrol and hear two men grunting in the bathroom. They go to investigate the disturbance and find that one inmate is sodomizing the other inmate in one of the bathroom stalls. The two officers break the two inmates up. The junior officer asks where he should take the inmates and whether he should send them to box. The senior officer decides that only the inmate being sodomized should go to solitary confinement. The junior officer, clearly confused asks "why him and not the guy preforming the sodomization?" The senior officer looks at the junior officer and says "he already has his shit packed." 
What did the leper say to the prostitute? Keep the tip.
There was a very angry bodybuilder psychologist He had Freud rage
Shorty! Yo' momma is so short, I can see her feet in her driver's license. 

😂🤣😂🤣😂🤣
I would be a great Politician... I'm really good at pissing everyone off.
How did the hipster burn his tongue? He drank his coffee before it was cool.
A cowboy buys a horse...   When he buys the horse, the salesman says "This horse belonged to a priest, so to make it move you have to say Praise the Lord! and to make it stop you have to say hallelujah."

 The cowboy takes the horse for a ride. He's riding the horse but then forgets how to stop it. When he remembers, he says "Hallelujah!" and the horse stops right at the edge of a canyon. After that he thanked God for saving him and yells "Praise the Lord!"
What do you call a Panda who eats, shoots, and leaves? A Pandit.

(bandit)
OC by BatManBenJamIn
Something only 6000bc kids will get THE original OPs mom.
I was startled by a loud fart... I was fartled.
2010s Kids won't get this A good president.
Only Baby Boomers will get this... The Draft.
Y'know what I find odd? Whole numbers that are not divisible by 2.
Frank was getting ready to go on a trip to New York for the first time, and was talking to his friend Bill. 

Bill: “While you are in New York, there is a bar that you have to go to. When you walk through the front door, you are handed a free drink. Then you can go to the back room and get laid. Come back up to the bar, and you get another free drink. Then you can get laid again. It goes on like this all night.”

Frank: “That sounds unbelievable. Have you really been there?”

Bill: “No, but my sister has.”
When Henry VIII has trouble in school, what does he do? He hires a Tudor. 
How do you tell the difference between a Methodist and a Baptist? Methodist will say hi in a liquor store.
I wrote on my little sisters cast today "They say the lack of brain in a blonde is accounted for with brawn... Guess not"
What do clams do for their birthday? They shellibrate...
only 30's kids will get this: The holocaust.
Heard about the famous italian chef that died? He pastaway, here today gone tomato,we cannoli do so much. He will be pizza history!
Two soldiers are in a tank Both of them drowned

Credit: from a comment by /u/KillarKittens, slightly modified
What do Magic Johnson, Charlie Sheen and roughly 250,000 children in Africa have in common? A continuing chance to create a better tomorrow. 

You **sick** bastards. 
'70s kids won't get this Measles
Only African people will get this Ebola
I like my women like i like my coffee. I fucking hate coffee.
You know you live in a first world country..... When you're not dead 
What is the difference between a cucumber and a shark attack? One is a pickle you can make, the other is a pickle you can't escape. 
Why are fights between fictional creatures so boring? Because they always drag on.
Just because it's simple, doesn't mean it's easy Unless we're talking about your mom
A man goes to the doctor The doctor says, "What's wrong with you?"

The man replies, "Doctor, there's a lot of things wrong, please look me over."

The doctor agrees and starts his examination. He's only barely begun and when he tries to look in the man's ear, he exclaims, "my God man, there's a piece of lettuce in there!"

The man sighs and says, "I know Doc, and that's only the tip of the iceberg. "


I just heard there was a cure for dyslexia. That's like music to my arse!
What do you call sodium chloride beating someone up with Bruce Lee's corpse? A salt with a dead Lee weapon
[NSFW] [LONG] A 5 year old boy is watching his dad work on the car with his neighbor Bob The boy asks "daddy, what does it sound like when bird sees another bird?"  

The father drops a wrench "tweet tweet tweet. I'm working junior."  

Father and Bob go back to working on the car. The little boy's eyes perk up.   

"Daddy, what do dogs say when they are happy to see another dog?"   

Father, annoyed responds "woof woof woof. Stop asking so many questions, we're working"  

The little boy is distracted for a moment when he says "Daddy, what does mommy say when she is happy to see you?" Father doesn't immediately respond. The little boy, perturbed yells, "DADDY!!"  

Father is startled and bangs his head on the engine, beginning to bleed, he screams "Oh god, fuck me!" Bob scrambles for a towel.  

The little boy says, "Silly, Daddy, that's what mommy says when she talks to Bob in her room while you're at work, I asked what she says when she's happy to see you."  
I learned a new way to stop the pot from boiling over Stick your fucking face in it 
What do you call some who kidnaps cats? A kittnapper. 
What do you call a Chinese guy covered in iron? A Chink in the Armor

OC pls no steal
If you're American before you go to the bathroom, and you're American when you come out of the bathroom, what are you while you are in the bathroom? European!
Only anti-vaxxers will get this... Polio
Deaf people seem to be the best at relationships They always let their hands do the talking
What's the deal with airline food? 


Oh wait, there is no deal because it's overpriced when available.
A rabbi is on his deathbed... ...and a friend asks him if he has any last requests. The Rabbi asks his friend to find him a Catholic priest, so that he might convert.

Confused, his friend asks, "Rabbi, why? You have been a great teacher and leader of your followers, and you have led a good and honorable Jewish life. Why would you want to become a Catholic now, before you die?"
He says, "Eh, better one of them than one of us."
The US have been really progressive in the last decade... In 2009 they got their first black president, and this year they got their first orange one!
Only Coal Miners Will Get This Black lung disease.
The School Janitor Janitor: I know im just a school janitor, but my eldest son is in M.I.T., his younger brother in Princeton, and my youngest in Harvard.

Student: (amazed) Wow, what are they studying?

Janitor: Oh no, they are janitors as well.
My girlfriend is leaving me because of my obsession with pasta I'm feeling cannelloni right now 
Linkin Park's web developer spent hours trying to fix a byte ordering bug. He tried so hard and got so far, but in the endian it doesn't even matter.
NSA.. Always listening to our customers.
Only 1700's sailors will get this... Scurvy 
Frequent browsers of /r/jokes will not get this. Laid.
Why is improve comedy like a dead language? Because it's Sanscript.
A world without women... ...would be a pain the ass.
Some people are into carbon dating. It's not for me. I dated carbon once, turns out they made everything up. 
People want to boycott brands because of political and religious views I just want to be able to afford those brands.
What's the difference between Reddit and Pornhub? On pornhub they down vote trash
Two brothers Two brothers are in their treehouse and they see a their neighbour undressing through her window. After seeing this the younger brother runs out the treehouse to his room. The older brother finds him and asks him what is wrong the younger brother says:

"Mum said if I see that then I'll turn to stone. I'm already feeling something turn hard."
I like my soda like I like my women Flat and room temperature.
A guy walks into a bar And sees 3 pieces of meat hanging from the ceiling. The guy asks,
“What’s this about?” The bartender replies,
“Well, if you can jump up and slap the meat,
you get free drinks for the rest of the night. If
you miss, you pay for everyone’s drinks for the
next hour. You wanna do it?” The guy replies,
“Nah, the steaks are too high.”
Why did the sperm cross the road? Because you put on the wrong sock this morning.
Dave drowned So at the funeral we got him a wreath in the shape of a lifebelt. Well, it's what he would have wanted.

- Gary Delaney, 2010
I just got my first BMW! Which tires are best for splashing puddles at cyclists and pedestrians?
An evil mathematician makes a plan to multiply binomials It was FOILed
if your phone is damaged place it in a bowl of rice this will attract Asians who will fix your phone.

if no Asians can be attracted with rice try uranium 
Wanna hear a word I just made up? Plagiarism. 
What's the funniest pepper? A jajajajajalapeño. 
Dont know how to say the word GIF? Just prounounce the G how its pronounced in gigantic
Welcome to Atlanta where the players play. For two and a half quarters then get blown away.
Life is short, how bout a blowjob? You might not think it's funny, but my wife found it hilarious.
Da Bomb Guy 1: You da bomb

Guy 2: No, you da bomb 

In America: a compliment. In the Middle East: an argument 
What did the lawyer name his daughter? Sue.
A priest and a bus driver are waiting at the gates of Heaven... Heard this joke whilst on holiday in Norway, I thought it was worth sharing.


In a rural mountainous village, both a local bus driver and a priest are waiting at the gates of heaven. Saint Peter arrives, and firsts asks the priest why he should be allowed into heaven. "I've been teaching the ideas of Christianity for 50 years, I think I deserve to be in heaven after devoting my life to Christ." St Peter then turns to the bus driver: "Well, I've been transporting people up and down the mountains for 50 years, I think I deserve to be in heaven as I've helped everyone dearly"


St Peter thinks, then allows the bus driver to walk through but not the priest. Outraged, the priest asks: "Why was I not allowed in but the bus driver was!?" St Peter replies: "Your lectures were boring, everyone was falling asleep and not paying respect to God! However, when the bus was driving up and down mountains, everyone was alert and saying their prayers!" 
Ned Stark's death was foretold in his daughter's name Because when he died, she was sans a Stark
A man walks into church and sits in the confessional booth. The priest sits down and the man says, "Forgive me for I have sinned. I was golfing yesterday and I cursed."

The priest replies, "Would you like to tell me what happened?"

"Well," the guy says. "I was out on the seventh hole, and I'd just hit my best drive of the day. Straight ahead, down the middle of the fairway, and a long way down. I was feeling pretty good about myself as I walked to the ball. I wasn't 30 feet away when a squirrel ran out of the trees and grabbed my ball."

The priest interrupts, "Oh, I see. So that's when you cursed?"

The man replies, "No Father, I didn't. As the squirrel was running away, it got to the end of the fairway when it was caught by a hawk, which flew high into the air."

Once again, he priest interrupts, "So that's when you cursed?"

The man continues, "No Father. The hawk started flying away, and I followed it, because it flew in the direction of the green. As it passed over the green, it squeezed the squirrel with its talons, causing the ball to drop about three feet from the pin."

The priest says, "Don't tell me you missed the fucking putt!"
What do you call a beehive without an exit? Unbelievable
A guy at a bar says to the bartender, "Hey jackass! Get me a beer." The bartender turns around, stares at the guy for a second, and proceeds to serve him a beer. 

The bartender walks to the other end of the bar, and another guy says "Hey, come on man. Don't let that jerk treat you that way." The bartender just shrugs and quietly walks away. 

A few minutes later, once again, the guy shouts "Hey jackass! Get me another beer!" 
Of course, the bartender obliges and serves him a beer. 

The other guy says "Look man, you can't let that guy do that to you. Stand up for yourself! Do you hear what he's calling you?" 

This time, the bartender replies, "Oh, that guy? HEE-HAW HEE-HAW HE ALWAYS calls me that!" 
What's the difference between Donald Trump and Aaron Burr? Trump *doesn't* want to be in the room where it happens.
My girlfriend is like a diamond. I don't have a diamond.
If flossing is a pain in the ass you are doing it at the wrong end
What was the name of the Greek hero who couldn't stop swaying from side to side? Oscillates

I'm not even going to apologise for this one.
Fun fact: Betsy Devos' name contains every letter of the alphabet that she knows of.
The Tramps Holiday There was this tramp. One cold winter's morning he was walking along a country road, when he heard a cry for help from a nearby lake.

Without a moment's hesitation he ran out onto the ice and slipped and slided over to a little girl. He managed to pull her out without breaking the ice further and carried her back to the road. He took off his coat and wrapped her in it then began looking for a car to flag down.

Coincidentally the father drives up. "How can I ever thank you sir?" he says after putting his daughter into the warmth of the limo. "Just name your price - I'm a wealthy man."

"Ah, well..." stammers the tramp, "... uh, I'm a little short of cash, perhaps you could help me out."

"Oh dear," says the father, "I don't carry much cash with me, I only have ten pounds - but come home with me and I'll get more from the safe."

"No! No!" says the tramp, "Why ten pounds is more money than I've seen in my whole life - that'll be plenty."

"Ten pounds," thinks the tramp, "I'm rich! I'm rich!" and off he goes to the town to buy himself a holiday.

He finds a travel agent, walks in - much to the disgust of the staff - and goes up to the desk. "I'll have one holiday please!"

"Ahem, which holiday would sir like?" asked the girl at the desk, forcing a smile.

"Oh, any holiday I don't mind, anything up to ten pounds," replies the tramp.

"TEN POUNDS! You'll NEVER get a holiday for ten pounds," says the girl incredulously.

She goes into the back of the shop, and searches in the deepest, dustiest filing drawers she can find. There - to her amazement - she finds an old file.

"Well you'll never believe it," she says to the tramp, back in the shop. "I've got you a holiday - its a super-duper, ultra-hyper, mega-economy class round the world cruise - and it costs ten pounds."

"Yippee!" exclaims the tramp, "I'll take it!"

A few days later he arrives at the port, and there in the dock is the most beautiful, most elaborately decorated, most expensive looking ocean-going liner he has ever seen.

"Get off my ship ye dirty bum!" shouts a voice, and an irate captain storms down the gangplank and kicks the tramp down onto the dockside.

"But I've got my ticket!", responds the tramp, "super-duper, ultra-hyper, mega-economy class, and I want on!"

"Well okay," says the captain, "but you can't come on just now, I don't want my first-class passengers seeing you. Come back at midnight when it's dark and I'll let you on then."

So the tramp finds himself a quiet spot among some cargo cases on the dockside, and he falls asleep.

"Psst," says a voice, waking him with a start. It was the captain.

"Hurry up, it's midnight, let's get you to your cabin."

The tramp toddles after the captain, along the dockside, up the gangway, and onto the ship - and what a ship!

First they went down through the first class level: Oriental carpets - 6" pile. A genuine Rembrandt on every wall. Leave your shoes outside for cleaning, and the steward brings a new pair. 24 ct gold trim everywhere.

Then the second class: As above, but perhaps the carpets were only 3" deep, and so on...

3rd, 4th, 5th class, down past the casinos, and the ballrooms, down through the crew's quarters, down through the galleys, and the engine rooms, until finally, at the lowest point in the ship, against the very hull, the captain opens a watertight door into a tiny 7' x 4' cabin, with a hammock, a bedside table, and an alarm clock.

"Sheer luxury!" exclaimed the tramp, "A room of my very own."

"I'm glad you like it," replies the captain, "but there is one more thing... Your class of ticket only allows you to use the facilities of the ship, at night - when all the other passengers are asleep. So that's what the alarm clock is for. Enjoy your cruise."

Well the cruise began, and the tramp had a whale of a time. Sleeping by day, and up on deck at night - he loved it. One-man-tennis, clay pigeon shooting, more food than he'd ever seen...

Then one morning, a week or so into the cruise, the tramp decided he'd have a go on the diving board of the pool. He had just enough time for one dive before he had to go below.

He climbed up the ladder, stepped onto the board tip, bounced, and dived...

... and what a dive...!

Perfectly poised in the air, he hit the water without so much as a ripple.

Now unknown to him, the captain - who'd grown rather fond of the poor old tramp - was standing watching this.

"That was amazing!" exclaimed the captain, "Where did you learn to dive like that?"

"Um, well I've never actually dived before," replied the tramp.

"Well that's incredible!" says the captain, "I've never seen..." He broke off. "Hey, I've got an idea", he started again. "How would you like to train a bit, and we'll put on a show for the other passengers. I'll pay you, and you can then afford to go first class!"

"It's a deal!" says our man. For the next 3 weeks the tramp practices like he's never practiced before. Back-flips, front-flips, triple-back sideways axled dives, you name it he tried it.

Then one morning the captain comes to talk. "Okay, I'd like you to stay in your cabin for the next 2 days. We're going to erect a high diving board for you."

"Okay," agreed the tramp.

Two days passed, and the big day arrived. The ship was humming with excitement. Everyone wanted to see the mystery diver. The captain had provided the tramp with a new pair of swimming trunks and he wore these as he stepped out onto the sun-beaten deck. Gasps of astonishment from the crowd, and a hushed awe. Higher than the eye could see, towering up and up, rose a slender column of metal.

"Well, tramp," said the captain, shaking his hand, "Let's see what you can do." And with that the Captain handed him a walkie talkie. And the tramp began to climb...

up and up...

below him the ship grew smaller...

on and on...

past a solitary albatross...

and still higher...

till the ship was but a speck on the ocean below...

and on still further...

/ till the ocean grew dim...

and the earth itself...

began to shrink...

past our moon...

and on...

and Mars...

and on...

higher, and higher...

through the asteroid belt...

and on and on towards the diving board...

past the outer planets, until...

on the outermost reaches of the Solar System...

he reached the board.

He climbed on top and radioed the captain...

and then...

.' '.
. .
. .
he jumped.
.
.
.
.
:
Slowly at first,
:
but speeding up,
:
:
:
faster, and faster,
:
speeding past Pluto,
:
and the other outer planets,
.
.
.
.
.

.

.

.

.


through the asteroid belt,

past Mars,

and the moon,

faster,

and faster,

faster - ever faster,

and by now the earth was growing large in the distance, the oceans and land masses grew clear,

faster, and faster,

past the albatross,

double-back somersault,

and he could see the ship, tiny in the distance,

hurtling down now, he posed, ready for the final 500 feet,

Down on the ship the crew strained their necks,

"I CAN SEE HIM!" yelled a passenger, "LOOK!!!"

The tramp streaked down towards the pool, did a last triple flip, and dove...

NOT A RIPPLE ON THE SURFACE!

DOWN THROUGH THE WATER!

SMASHED THROUGH THE POOL BOTTOM!

DOWN THROUGH THE FIRST DECK!

SMASHING THROUGH THE SECOND!

DOWN!

DOWN!

THROUGH THE CREW'S QUARTERS!

THROUGH THE ENGINE ROOMS!

SMASHING THROUGH HIS OWN LITTLE CABIN!

AND DOWN THROUGH THE DOUBLE-STRENGTH STEEL HULL OF THE SHIP!

STILL DOWN...!

DEEPER,

DEEPER INTO THE MURKY DEPTHS,

TILL.........

SMASH!

Into the sea bed, sinking a 37' shaft in the process.

Desperate for air he struggle out of the shaft, his lungs bursting he swam frantically for the surface.

Up and up, desperate, gasping...

Out of the water, up the ladder onto the deck of the ship, into a throng wild with acclaim.

"HERO!" "WONDERFUL!" "AMAZING!" "GOOD SHOW THAT!"

And handing him a heated towel the captain spoke, as a hush fell over the crowd.

"Well tramp, I have NEVER seen anything like that, EVER. That was the most *STUPENDOUS* piece of diving I have ever seen."

The tramp blushed.

The captain went on, "but tell me, most amazing of all is how you survived smashing through this boat after you dived - how did you do it."

And the tramp looked at the captain, and the crowd and replied modestly: "Well you see...

I'm a just poor tramp...

so you must understand...

I've been through many a hard ship in my life."

Doctor, am I dying? "Doctor, am I dying? I hurt all over, I can't sleep at night, and I have trouble staying conscious"

Doctor: Nope, you're just a college student.
What do you get when you cross the Atlantic with the titanic? About halfway.
If two vegans are fighting... ...is it still called a beef?
I had dinner with Bernie Sanders and a couple of his staffers last night And when the bill came and nobody reached for it, I eventually took it and paid for it in full plus tip.

On our way out Bernie was very happy and exclaimed "That was a great meal, and to think, it was provided to us at no cost!"
At a Nazi mine A worker calls out to Hitler:

"Sir, we are mining too many useless Ores"

[Hitler rubs his chin, contemplating]

"So mine less"

[Grammar Nazi chimes in, from above]

"MINE FEWER"

[Hitler looks up]

"Yes?"
Recruitment lady on phone - Sir I have two openings for you.. Me - Yes, I know.

(Long silence)

Her - asshole

Me - prefer the other one...
I ordered some flowers for my wife from 1800Flowers... Now what is she going to do with a truckload of roses?
The Mute Child The little kid never said a word, never uttered a syllable his entire life. Parents took him to doctor after doctor - each doctor said "I have no idea why he can't talk, I can't find any reason for him to remain silent". So the parents finally gave up and accepted their boy couldn't speak and as time passed their son got older. The boy had turned twelve and one morning at the breakfast table he suddenly said in a loud voice "**these pancakes taste like shit**. Well, his mom was shocked and dropped the dishes she had in hand. She looked at him and exclaimed "Little Bobby - YOU CAN TALK?!?!", and the boy replied "yeah". She was quiet for a moment as the realization sunk in, and then asked "well, why haven't you said anything your whole life up until now?".

--

He said "everything has been fine 'til now".
Three nuns were sitting on a park bench when a flasher walks by The first nun, well, she had a stroke.  The second nun, why, she also had a stroke.  The third nun didn't touch it.
I don't usually brag..... I don't usually brag about my finances, but my credit card company calls me almost every day to tell me my balance is outstanding. 
One fine evening a man was riding his motorcycle... ...down a rural country road. It was a gorgeous sight against the red and orange sunset. He had been riding for about an hour and passed all sorts of country sights. A tractor in a field. Cows grazing. A canopy tunnel of trees. And different novelty mailboxes including a bright pink one. . Suddenly a downpour came upon him. The sudden rain made the roads very slippery and he wound up laying the bike over in a ditch. This caused some parts to come loose and hoses break. He reached for his phone but  it was soaked and unable to turn on after the accident.

Stranded and alone, he decided to walk down the road back the way he came. The pink mailbox was less than a mile away and he figured there was a house nearby. As he finally started to reach the pink mailbox, he noticed there were pink flowers planted around it. He thought nothing of it and made his way down the long now-muddy road. After a few minutes he came upon a huge pink gate with pink railings and a pink call box.

The man rang the pink box and a pink tinted screen came on with an old lady answering,“Hello?”

“Hello,” said the man. “I’ve been riding down the road and had an accident. Would it be alright if I came in and used your phone? My cell phone is soaked.”

“Of course!” said the old woman. And the huge pink gate gave a creak as it opened up.

The man walked through the huge pink gate and walked up to her house. It was a massive, 3-story, colonial style house with a porch that wrapped completely around. And it was all pink. The house had pink bushes planted in front. Pink steps with pink banisters led up to the pink porch with pink rocking chairs and pink ceiling fans. He walked up and rang the pink doorbell which gave out a very bright and pleasant “ding.” 

The large pink front door opened up and the old woman greeted him with a smile. She was wearing a pink nightgown and pink slippers.

“Please, come in,” she said, and motioned her little hand inside.

As the man stepped inside, his jaw dropped. Every single thing inside the house was pink. The tile on the floor was two-toned, checkerboard style pink. The curtains we pink with pink embroidery embellishments. Even the frames on the windows were pink. He took a step and started to take his muddy boots off when he noticed the pink umbrella holder and pink coat rack. 

“You are soaked to the bone! Would you like a towel to dry off?” asked the little pink woman.

“Yes, please,” answered the man.

“Go into the kitchen. The telephone is in there,” she instructed, as she went into another room.

The man made his way across the entry room into the kitchen. His hand lightly swept across the pink dresser, along the pink walls and pink trim, down the pink door frame, and to the small pink dining table. He sat in a pink chair and picked up the pink rotary phone. Even the telephone wire was pink. He attempted to dial a number but the phone seemed to be disconnected.

The little pink lady came in with a large pink towel and handed it to the man. It was warm as if it had just come out of the clothes dryer.

“Thank you so much,” said the man. “But I think your phone is disconnected because of the storm.”

The pink lady responded,”Oh, that’s a shame. Well, if you need to you can stay in one of the guest bedrooms for the night.”

The man thanked her for her kindness and made his way up the pink stairs, holding onto the pink banister. He walked down the pink hallway with pink wallpaper. He walked into a bedroom and found it to be completely pink. On the pink bed were some pink pajamas, a pink robe, another pink towel, and a pink travel toothbrush wrapped in plastic. He took the pink towel, pink robe, and pink toothbrush and went to the bathroom to wash up before bed.

In the bathroom, the man undressed and used the pink soap and pink shampoo to wash himself. Then he dried himself with the pink towel and put on the pink robe. He used the pink sink to brush his teeth with the pink toothbrush with the pink toothpaste that was already in the pink bathroom.

He then went back into the pink bedroom and changed into his pink pajamas. He laid down on the bed and covered himself with the pink blanket and pink sheet. Then, laying his head down on the pink pillow, he fell right to sleep.

In the morning, the man woke up and made his way downstairs. In the hallway, he ran into two other men. They introduced themselves and explained to each other why they were there. One man had slid into a ditch near the motorcycle accident and lost his phone. The other man was the pink lady’s nephew who came in earlier that morning. 

After making their way down, they came upon the little old lady was already dressed in a pink top and pink pants with little pink shoes. She was carrying the man’s clothes and asked the gentlemen if they would like breakfast.

“Would you like bacon and eggs or oatmeal?” she asked.

“I’ll have oatmeal, Auntie.”

“I’ll have bacon and eggs,” said the man in the car accident.

“I’ll have bacon and eggs, as well,” said the man in the motorcycle accident.

“Very good,” said the little pink lady. 

She made the breakfast with her pink cooking utensils and pink pots and pans. The bacon sizzled and steam rose into the pink vent. She took out some pink plates and pink silverware and set them on the table where the men were seated. She brought down some pink glasses and poured each man some strawberry milk.

They all ate and were satisfied with their breakfast. The man tried the phone again and it was working. He called his wife and asked her to come pick him up. The man in the car accident used the phone and asked his roommate to pick him up.

A few hours later, the wife and the roommate both show up and pick up their respective husband and friend. And they all lived happily ever after.

There is one conclusion we can take from this story.

Two out of three men prefer bacon and eggs over oatmeal.
What do you get if you add yeast to soup? A souprise
My ex always used to annoy me by saying I have terrible aim for a hitman. I miss her.
The paranormal community is in an uproar over a recent surge in "black ghost" sightings only near sources of light Despite proof these are shadows, no one knows what (or who) these entities are.
1989 Alaskan Wild life will get this... Oil
Only 50,000 BC kids will get this Ugga: Ung bung uhh mang Bunga tankun ung

Bunga: Nanga uhh ung tangung uhh...unganun

Ugga: Inga Bunga langa ung ugg Ugga?

Bunga: Ung bunga uhh tangung angu OOK OOOOOK
The Mexican word of the day.. The Mexican word of the day is cashew.

Like I'll cashew outside, how bout dat?
What do you call a native american who's balding? A patchy. 
Can circumsized men ride bikes on the sidewalk? ..or do you have to be a complete dick..
Back in the 70's you could hold out your hand and a car would pick you up and take you where you need.... Today we call that child abduction.
Heard the sperm bank gives $50 for your sperm. I have a sock in my room worth $3000.
My mother-in-law fell in a wishing well. I didn't know they worked. 
A set of jumper cables walks into a bar. The bartender says, "I'll serve you, but don't start anything."
A mexican magician tells the audience he will disappear on the count of 3. He says, "Uno, dos..." and then *poof* … he disappeared without a tres!
What's Donald Trump's favorite operating system? Windows. 
I went to jail after dropping the soap. I mean gel, learned my lesson the first time.
How tall is Betsy DeVos? We don't know, she can't measure growth.
What does a bee say when it returns to it's hive? Honey, I'm home!
The awards ceremony at the dog show went horribly wrong. The trophy maker had a grudge against the show. To shame them, the 6 foot trophy was of a feline's behind instead of a pedigree dog.

Showrunners and dog owners called the event a "Catastrophe." 
My girlfriend said she wanted to try and get rid of her "love handles". I told her she would look stupid without any ears.
what is cows favorite video sharing website MOOtube 
What's the difference between your friends and an asshole? I don't stab my asshole when it talks shit.
How many Potatoes does it take to kill an Irishman? None.
A newly graduated doctor is assigned to a rural area, and after a few days he realizes that there were no women in the village, they were all men. After taking a bit of confidence he asks one of his patients that they did when they had the need for sex and the patient replied: That they went down to the river.

The weekend came and the doctor went to the river, and there was a huge line of men standing on the shore of the river. Being so well-known in the village, the locals gave him their position on the line, until he reaches the top of the line.

Looking ahead the doctor realizes that there is a donkey, he thinks: Wow, have sex with an animal? Poor people. And I cannot deny me now that they have so graciously ceded their positions.

Within fifteen minutes of having sex with the donkey, while all the men in the row watched, as he kissed her and bit her ears, one of them walks up to him and secretly ask him: Doctor, how long till you finish? We need the donkey to cross the river, there is a village with women there.

How many potatoes does it take to kill an Irish family? Zero.
Why do midgets always laugh when they play soccer? Because the grass tickles their balls.
What do you call the American president when he's taking his prescription hair-loss medication? ...IM-P.O.T.U.S.     
Overheard at the Gynecologist Office: A blonde, a brunette & red head are waiting to be seen at the Gynecologist office. All three are pregnant. They start talking to eachother about their babies.

Brunette: I'm going to have a boy because I was on top during sex.

Redhead: Well, I was on the bottom during sex so I'm having a girl. 

Blonde: Oh my God! I'm going to have puppies!!!


According to a recent study, men on dating sites are more popular if they mention dancing or cooking. Because if there’s one thing women love, it’s a man who can lie.
My girlfriend said she dosent want to be with me anymore I was very suprised that my right hand can talk
Deaf people seem tough to me Because they always let their fists do the talking
You know your pitbull loves you when... You wake up with all your limbs intact. 
Four rappers are asked to think of a word that rhymes with orange Eminem: Door hinge

Lil Wayne: nigga

Chris brown: orange

Lil b: bicycle﻿
My friend started annoying me with fowl bird puns But toucan play at that game
The teacher asks the class to use a sentence with the words defense and defeat. The Mexican rasies his hand and says, "I jumped dee fence with dee feet."
If Vladimir Putin wanted to poison a Mexican political enemy, would he use pollonium... Or would he be too chicken?
Confensual sex A couple had been married for 40 years, and decided for their anniversary they would go to the same spot they went on their honeymoon those 40 years ago. It was a nice little spot by a farm, with rolling hills visible in the distance.

As they strolled down a path next to the cows, the husband smacked his wife on the behind and said "You know honey, 40 years ago we had sex right here, up against this fence. You remember?"

She replied "Yes, I do remember. We sure were something back then, werent we?"

He answered "Indeed. How about we do it again for old time's sake?"

With that, they proceeded to have sex up against the same fence that they done it against as newlyweds.

When finished, the old man exclaimed "Wow honey, you really had a good time, didnt you? You havent moved that much in a long time, in fact, I dont even know if you moved that much when we had sex here 40 years ago!"

She said "Well, 40 years ago that fence wasnt electrified."
Here's an insider tip that will save you thousands on your next vacation. Don't go.
A man thought his wife was losing her hearing A man thought his wife was losing her hearing. He was going to the doctor for a check up one day, so he decided to ask the doctor for advice while he was there. He said to the doctor, "Doc, I think my wife is hard of hearing. Sometimes when I ask her questions she can't hear me. What should I do?" The doctor replied, "Here's what you need to do. Tonight while your wife is making dinner in the kitchen, go into the bedroom and ask her what's for dinner. If she doesn't hear you, go into the living room and ask again. If she doesn't hear you while you're in the living room, go into the dining room and ask a third time. If she still can't hear you even from the dining room, go into the kitchen and ask one more time. If she can't hear you while you're in the kitchen, then she must be losing her hearing."

So the man took the doctor's advice and tested it out on his wife that night. First, he went into the bedroom and called out to his wife, "Honey, what's for dinner?" No response. So he moved into the living room. He called out again, "Honey, what's for dinner?" No response. So he moved again, this time into the dining room. "Honey what's for dinner?" Still no response. So finally, he moved into the kitchen where his wife was making dinner and asked once more, "Honey, what's for dinner?" His wife turned to look at him with an angry look on her face and said, "Chicken. I told you three times, dumbass."


I don't trust anyone with a conspiracy theory, man. I think they are all up to something. 
Why did the binary computer cross the road? 01010100 01101111 00100000 01100111 01100101 01110100 00100000 01110100 01101111 00100000 01110100 01101000 01100101 00100000 01101111 01110100 01101000 01100101 01110010 00100000 01110011 01101001 01100100 01100101
A piece of string walks into a bar... "Hi, I'd like to be served please." Says the string.

"We cannot serve you, as you are only a string." Said the bartender.

Upset, the string comes out of the bar, tears apart his ends, and walks back inside.

"Hi, I'd like to be served please." Says the string.

"Aren't you just the string I said I won't serve?" The bartender asks.

The string says "Nope, I'm a frayed knot!"
Why did the cow go to the gym? To work on his calves.
Trump is a real asset to the country! Fucking Siri! I said *Ass Hat* not *Asset*!!!
Sometimes when I turn off the lights and masturbate, it feels like Jesus is watching me. Mexican prison is shit.
What does a neckbeard get when he's sick A malady.
American healthcare be like Ooh no insurance? Bad news you owe $500 I am so sorry!

Oh you have insurance! Great news, in that case bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit but fortunately all you would owe is only $700 for deductible and copay! 
I hate housework. You do the dishes and you do the washing. Then six months later you have to start again.
Mr. Pott was an average man, with an extraordinary skin condition One day Mr. Pott (legend says his first name was Arthur) went to the doctor to get his skin checked out. He said "Doctor, I have a very odd skin condition. Multiple times a day, my skin will puff up and get all red almost instantly, with no warning."

The doctor thought this was very odd, and wanted to have Mr. Pott wait with him in one of his rooms for a while to see if he could catch the odd phenomenon. 

They waited...

And waited...

THERE! No, that was just a trick of the light...

Hours went by...

Finally it was time for the doctor's office to close. Mr. Pott left the office, and as soon as he got into his car, his skin got all red and puffy. 

He called the doctor the next day, and said that it happened again as soon as he got into his car, and asked if he could come back into the office. The doctor said sure, since he wasn't busy that day.

Again Mr. Pott and the doctor waited to witness the described symptoms, but again, nothing happened all day. 

That night, as Mr. Pott was getting into his car, he broke out in a rash almost instantly. 

Mr. Pott again called the doctor and asked to come in. 

Every day Mr. Pott would go see the doctor. This went on for days, weeks, and finally months, to no avail. 

In fact, the doctor never did see the odd skin condition, because a watched Pott never boils. 

Edit: A name