A wife was ecstatic that she was going to have twins... ....being the superstitious woman she is, she went to a fortune teller to see her children's fortunes. 

Fortune Teller: "I have great news, and greater news!  You see, one child is going to be a very good professional Football player!  Your other child, will be an extremely famous musician!"

The wife is amazed, and cannot WAIT to tell her husband the news.  She gets home, and tells her husband. Yet, she doesn't get the reaction she had hoped for. 

The husband goes: "WHAT?!?  No child of mine will EVER be a musician!"

The husband picks up the nearest lamp, and chucks it towards his wife's belly. The lamp hit the stomach and shattered. Suddenly, a soft beat was playing from somewhere.  A face presses against the mothers stomach and starts..

"*Bum bum bum bum* you hit my brotha but you didn't hit me! Bum bum bum bum"
I took my wife out the other day. What a great shot it was.
I built a Rollercoaster park but it's not as good as a lot of others It definitely has its ups and downs thiugh
daughter prayer A family was having guests to dinner. At the table, the mother turned to her six-year-old daughter and says, "Dear, would you like to say the blessing?"
"I wouldn't know what to say," replies the little girl.
"Just say what you hear Mommy say, sweetie."
Her daughter takes a deep breath, bows her head, and solemnly says, "Dear Lord, why the hell did I invite all these people to dinner?
Why should you never trust harp players? They're always pulling strings 
So a conservative and a liberal walk into a bar. The bartender says, "it's malt liquor night, in honor of black history month. Can I get you a 40?" The liberal says "sure that sounds all right." The conservative says "no thanks I'm alt-right." 
90s kids won't get this either Jobs
Two fish are in a tank... Suddenly, one turns to the other and says:
"Do you know how to drive this thing?"
3 guys are walking next to some mud and find some bricks. They want to see who can throw the bricks the highest but can't seem to figure out how to measure the height that they threw it. One of the guys says "we can just measure how far the brick sinks into the mud."  The other two agree to this. The first guy throws his brick and it lodges itself a foot and a half in the mud. The second guy throws his brick up and it lands three feet into the mud. The last guy throws his brick up with all his might... and it doesn't come back down. 

One day a woman decided to go on a vacation with her parrot. She wanted to go to France but the only tickets she could get were no parrot no smoking tickets. Not wanting to leave her parrot at home, she simply stores the parrot in her shirt and acts like she is pregnant. While on the plane, the pilot is walking down the aisle smoking a cigar. He stops at the woman and asks her how her flight is going. Before she can reply, the parrot says "it's going great". Surprised, the pilot pulls the parrot out from under her shirt. "You can't have a parrot on this plane!" He says. She takes the cigar from his mouth and says "Well you can't have a cigar on this plane!" Enraged, the pilot throws the parrot out the window. This incites the woman to throw the cigar out the window. The pilot returns to the cockpit and is angry about losing his cigar. He's about to light up another one when he hears a knock on the windshield. He looks up and sees the parrot. And what was in his mouth? 

A brick. 
How does one think the unthinkable with an itheberg
whats the saddest story called? my wife.
What's the difference between a hockey player and a hippy? The hockey player showers after three periods. 
A pirate captain walks into a bar... 

...with a peg leg, a steering wheel hanging from his pants, and a parrot on his shoulder. 

Bartender: "Excuse me Captain, but you have a steering wheel hanging from your pants!" 

Pirate: "Arrrrr, I know. It's driving me nuts."
There is a fine line between numerator and denominator but only a fraction of people will get the joke
Did you hear the joke of the bathroom? I didn't either; the door was closed! 
A man walks into an online forum.. A man walks into an online forum and tells a joke that nobody really understands.


Get it?
How do you get a fish on the line? You call him.
Where did Timmy go during the explosion? **EVERYWHERE**.

He had a newfound respect for life after being spared from such a life-changing event. He went to Arizona, Colorado, New York, England, then settled down in Paris with his now-engaged girlfriend.
My son is nearly 21 years old, but he still gets pampered. He says he's ready for big boy undies, but I'm not sure.
Jim and Trish are both mental patients. One day Jim jumps into the swimming pool but, doesn't come up for air. Quick as a flash, Trish sees her friend in trouble, so dives in and pulls him out.

Later, the hospital director calls Trish into his office and says 'Trish, Ive got some good news and some bad news. The good news is, we are releasing you as you are obviously sane 'saving anothers life'. But unfortunately, the bad news is that Jim hanged himself in the bathroom ...'

'Oh no' Trish replies, 'that's where I put him to dry !'
What's the difference between Betsy DeVos and a Grizzly Bear? Betsy DeVos is an actual threat to school children.
I am a serial monogomist I am loyal to my cornflakes. 
'90s kids won't get this (cont.) Measles.
Everyone loves to talk about how much they support people with mental illness, but they never follow through when I ask them for help Then they're all like "oh my god" and "calm down" and "sir this is the produce isle please stop crying into the cabbage"
Roses are red, violets are blue. If he's busy on Valentines Day... ...the side chick is you.
I like my coffee black and without crackers.
Donald Trump calls the media 'fake news' even when they're directly quoting something he said/tweeted... ...but since most of the things he says are fake, by transitive property, the news is fake too
The doctor gave me 6 months to live. So I shot him. The judge gave me 20 years. Problem solved.
When I was younger, I really wanted a skateboard but my parents couldn't afford one; so one morning, I woke up early and went to the garage, I got some wood and some nails… and beat my parents to death.

My foster parents bought me 5 skateboards.
I searched up why incest porn has become so popular this year. Apparently Alabama just recently got internet connection.
Breaking: Betsy DeVos has cancelled.... the subject-verb agreement. 
What do traffic lights and liberals have in common? They stop you turning right.. even though it’s safe to do so.

*And I’m sure there’s more… please feel free to add !

What do you call the wife of a hippy? Mississippi 
Only 1300's kids will get this.. The Black Plague 
This 60 year old woman was walking along 5th Avenue when she heard a voice from above "You will live to be 100." This 60 year old woman was walking along 5th Avenue when she heard a voice from above 

"You will live to be 100." 

She looked around and didn't see anyone. Again she heard "You will live to be 100." 

Boy, she thought to herself, that was the voice of God. I've got 40 more years to live! 

So off she went to the plastic surgeon. She got everything fixed from head to toe. 

When she left the plastic surgeon's office, she got hit by a bus,died, and went up to heaven. 

She said to God "You told me I would live to be 100. I was supposed to have had 40 more years.
So how come you let the bus kill me?". 

God said: "I didn't recognize you". 
The Muslim Ban  Several centuries ago, the Pope decreed that all Muslims had to convert to Catholicism or leave Italy. There was a huge outcry from the Muslim community, so the Pope offered a deal. He'd have a religious debate with the leader of the Muslim community. If the Muslims won, they could stay in Italy; and if the Pope won, they'd have to convert or leave.

The Muslim people met and picked an aged and wise Mufti to represent them in the debate. However, as the Mufti didn't speak Italian, and the Pope didn't speak Arabic, they agreed that it would be a "silent" debate.

On the chosen day the Pope and Mufti sat opposite each other. The Pope raised his hand and showed three fingers. The Mufti looked back and raised one finger. Next, the Pope waved his fingers around his head. The Mufti pointed to the ground where he sat. The Pope brought out a communion wafer and a chalice of wine. The Mufti pulled out an apple. With that, the Pope stood up and declared himself beaten and said that the Moulana was too clever. The Muslims could stay in Italy.

Later the cardinals met with the Pope and asked him what had happened. The Pope said, "First I held up three fingers to represent the Trinity. He responded by holding up a single finger to remind me there is still only one God! Then, I waved my finger around my head to show him that God was all around us. He responded by pointing to the ground to show that God was also right here with us. I pulled out the wine and wafer to show that God absolves us of all our sins. He pulled out an apple to remind me of the original sin. He beat me at every move and I could not continue!"

Meanwhile, the Muslim community gathered to ask the Mufti how he'd won. "I haven't a clue," the Mufti said. "First, he told me that we had three days to get out of Italy, so I gave him as they call it 'the finger.' Then he tells me that the whole country would be cleared of Muslims and I told him that we were staying right here!" "And then what?" asked a woman. "Who knows?" said the Mufti. "He took out his lunch so I took out mine."

Edit: First time I heard this joke was around a year ago, but I had never heard the Jewish one until shortly after. So yeah, I'm well aware it's a repost, but, obviously by the votes, not that many people heard it the first time around (or second, third...fifth...twenty-second...etc.) so thank you, but it has already been pointed out.
Blonde A blonde goes to a restaurant, buys a coffee and sits down to drink it. She looks on the side of her cup and she finds a peel-off prize. She pull off the tab and yells, "I WON! I WON! I WON a motor home; I WON a motor home!"
 The waitress runs over and says, "That's impossible. The biggest prize given away was a mini van!"
 The blonde replies, "No. I WON A motor home, I WON a motor home!"
 By this time the manager makes his way over to the table and says, "You couldn't possibly have won a motor home because we didn't have that as a prize!" Again the blonde says, "No, no mistake, I WON a motor home, I WON a motor home!" The blonde hands the prize ticket to the manager and he reads, "WIN A BAGEL." 

Subreddits appreciating something usually have one of two titles: Xisbeautiful(r/dataisbeautiful) or Xporn(r/earthporn) Let's just say that r/internetisbeautiful would have a lot more subscribers if they chose the latter
Does your Mum like chicken? No? I bet your Nando's
When God closes a door He opens a window. THAT'S WHY IT'S SO FUCKING COLD IN HERE!
What do you call a food that used to be enjoyed by the poor, but is now eaten by the wealthy elite? Gentrifried rice. 
!false It's funny because it's true.
This morning I woke up to a blow job. Oh wait, my job blows every morning.
Scientists have genetically modified a Venus Fly Trap to have the skin of a cactus They say its bark is worse than its bite. 
An 85-year old man needs to give a sperm sample... [Long] An 85-year-old man was requested by his doctor for a sperm count as part of his physical exam.

The doctor gave the man a jar and said, "Take this jar home and bring back a semen sample tomorrow."

The next day the 85-year-old man reappeared at the doctor's office and gave him the jar, which was as clean and empty as on the previous day.

The doctor asked, what happened and the man explained. "Well, doc, it's like this---first I tried with my right hand, but nothing.

Then I tried with my left hand, but still nothing. Then I asked my wife for help. She tried with her right hand, then with her left, still nothing. She tried with her mouth, first with the teeth in, then with her teeth out, still nothing. 

We even called up Arleen, the lady next door and she tried too, first with both hands, then an armpit, and she even tried squeezin' it between her knees, but still nothing."

The doctor was shocked! "You asked your neighbor?"

The old man replied, "Yep, none of us could get the jar open.".
A boob, a vagina and an asshole walk into a bar... A boob, a vagina and an asshole walk into a bar and they start debating on who is the greatest of the three of them!

Boob - "I give milk to new born babies and I'm attractive to the opposite sex, that's why I am the greatest!"
Vagina - "That's nothing, I give birth to new born and can accommodate the opposite sex, that's why I am the greatest!" .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.


Why are you scrolling down? It's your turn to speak.
What did one drunk muslim say to another? I'm drunk Ash-faq
When you disagree with someone, it is always better to walk a mile in their shoes. That way, you'll be a mile away from them. And you'll have their shoes.
Was hit by a rental car earlier today... It still Hertz.
What the best way to get anybody's pussy wet? Drop their cat in a pool 
What did the grape say when it got squashed? Nothing; it just let out a little wine.
What type of weather is the most offensive? Darude - Sandstorm
That awkward moment when you realise your new 'promotion' involves less power, less money, and less influence.# -DJT
What's the difference between a Ferrari and 3 dead babies... I don't have a Ferrari in my garage. 
Got sacked from my drug counselling job just because they didn't like my motto. 'It's my way or the highway'.
What is a wolfs favorite puzzle? AWOOObix cube!
What do you call an illegal immigrant fighting a child rapist? Alien vs Predator
Christina Aguilera, Justin Timberlake, Ryan Gosling. Christina Aguilera, Justin Timberlake, Ryan Gosling. Shit. I guess I do have an obsession with Britney's peers.
Trump is the type of guy who will look you square in the eye and shake your hand like a man. While taking a piss on your boots. 
A bear and a rabbit were taking a shit in the woods The bear turned around and asked the rabbit, "do you have a problem with shit sticking to your fur?"

"No" the rabbit replied.

So the bear wiped his ass with the rabbit.
What did one π rad say to the other π rad? "arrrr matey!"
A man describes his dreams to the psychiatrist. Man - "Last night I dreamed that I was a teepee. The night before I dreamed that I was a yurt. What does it mean?"
Psychiatrist - "You're two tents."
Two cows are standing in a field. *The first cow says*: did you hear about that "mad cow disease" that's going around? That sounds pretty terrible.

*The second cow says*: yeah, it does. Good thing us chickens don't have to worry about that!
Martelleus Bennett is refusing to meat with Donald Trump. Yeah, he's a real Patriot.
GoT joke: What do you call a Dothraki who does jumping jacks every morning? Khal Isthenics.
The restaurant Hooters is known for two things... ...boobs.
A boy asks a girl to prom.., ..and she says yes. Overexcited, he is told he must show up with a limo and a tuxedo. So he goes to the limo rental and waits in the limo line, and he gets the limo. Then, he goes to the tuxedo rental and waits in the tuxedo line. Finally, the big day comes, and he brings his date to prom. She asks him to get some punch. He goes over to get some punch, and realizes there is no punch line.
How does a mathematician solve their constipation? They work it out with a pencil
Why is the music award show in Canada called the Junos? Because everytime someone wins, everyone goes "Juno who that is?"
I used to have diarrhea ...but then I got my shit together.
Do you have a date for Valentine's Day? Yes February 14th.
Why did gravity and magnetism hook up? We don't fully know, but there were definitely forces of attraction at work.
There was a couple that was married 50 years They were sitting at the breakfast table one morning when the man said to his wife, 

"Just think, honey, we've been married for 50 years."

"Yeah," she replied, "Just think, fifty years ago we were sitting here at this breakfast table together." 

"I know," the man said, "We were probably sitting here naked as jaybirds fifty years ago." 

"Well," she snickered, "What do you
say...should we get naked?" 

Where upon the two stripped to the buff and sat down at the table. 

"You know, honey," the lady breathlessly replied, "My nipples are as hot for you today as they were fifty years ago."

"I wouldn't be surprised," replied Gramps. "One's in your coffee and the other is in your oatmeal!"
"....so then my wife told me to run out and get her some Head & Shoulders" "......nevertheless, this court still finds you guilty Mr. Dahmer"
Why do hummingbirds hum? They forgot the lyrics 
Andy has 150 candy bars. He eats 125. What does Andy have now? Andy has diabetes 
Why did a scientist install a door knocker? coz he wanted to win a no-bell prize!!!!!!!!
How do you teach someone to make an omelette? Show them an eggsample
I've never understood giving flowers to someone on Valentine's Day. "Here's a dying plant... because i love you?"﻿
I would call Donald Trump a cunt but he lacks both depth and warmth.
So I Heard Facebook has got a new fake news filter. All I wanna know is when they're gonna get the real one.
What do Betsy Devos and Jared from Subway have in common? Both of their main goal is to fuck children.
Did you hear the one about all the missing women in the area? No? Thats good then...
Two employees are standing next to a water cooler talking... One says to the other "Yaknow, our boss says we should be extraordinary but he's average in more ways than one"

"Yeah," says the other "you could say he's a double standard!"
Sex with no strings attached? Don't shag a puppet.
The best thing about Betsy DeVos being nominated as the head of department of education ... is the fact they are abolishing it completely. 
I think my cellmate was gay last time I went to jail His dick tasted like shit
What piece of sporting equipment is best for provoking a debate? Discus.
Some people just have a way with words and other people … oh … not have way
Stranger: "I've got no friends." Me: "You're not alone." 
Prison sex... It's con-sensual.
What do cows produce during an earthquake? MILKSHAKE!!!!
Two whales walk into a bar.... The first one says: "AOOOOOUUUUUOOOUUUUGGGAAAAUUUOOOOOOOOOOAAAAGOOOOGGGGUUUUUAAAAAAAAA"

The second one says: " Go home steve, your drunk
A guy named Paul works in Silicon Valley Paul and his friends are celebrating the successful release of the iPhone 8, and some of them - Paul included - get very drunk indeed. One of them manages to convince Paul, in his drunk state, that anything is edible when combined with enough potatoes and pastry. Paul thinks that this is the most amazing thing he's ever heard, and runs home to test it. After getting home, he looks around for non-food items to eat with potatoes, and eventually settles on the idea of trying to eat a Biro.

So he smashes the Biro into small pieces, combines it with a few potatoes, puts the mixture in a savoury pastry, and bakes it for a while. After it's baked, he's slightly less drunk and realises it's not such a great idea to try and eat a Biro, but he knows his friends won't let him forget it if he reneges on his commitment, so he eats it anyway. It takes him a while, and by the time he's finished he feels tired from chewing and wants to wait for the potato to digest, so he decides to try and sleep for a while.

While he's half sleeping and half just lying there, Paul - predictably enough - is thinking about Biros, and has a brainwave. His company can put their logo on anything and double the price, right? So why not start selling incredibly expensive writing implements? He writes this down in a fit of genius and takes it into the office the next day. He tells his manager about the idea, who then tells their own manager, and so on and so on. Apparently, someone at the top liked the idea, because the following month, Tim Cook calls a press conference to introduce his new product.

Tim walks up onto the stage holding a long, thin object. A larger picture comes up on screen - it's a Biro, but it's made of a light grey plastic and has the company logo on it. Tim announces that the stylish new design is going to be called the *iWrite*, and that it will cost $150 at launch.

However, to this day, within that office, it's still referred to by everyone who knows its origin as *pen-pie-nap Paul's Apple pen*.
August 6, 1945 Hiroshima The day Rice Krispies were invented. 
What was U2's lawyer's hourly rate? Nothing, he was pro-Bono 
I was reading a book about paint today and I just burst into tears I was overcome by emulsion
What did O say to Q? Put that thing away, there are kids here. 
Betsy DeVos's school funding plan... You start with $0. 

But if you sign up 5 kids for school, and those kids sign up 5 more kids, and THOSE kids sign up 5 more kids...
Two balloons were flying in the desert... ... and one of them said: "Be careful, there's a cactusssssssssssssssssssssssss".
What do you call a super model with a yeast infection? A quarter pounder with cheese
A Bin Man is Out Emptying Bins... He goes down the street, collects the bins, empties them and puts them back. He gets to one house and they don't have their bin out. Being the nice man that he is, he goes to ask the owner of the house where their bin is so they won't have to wait for it to be emptied.
So he knocks on the door and about a minute or two later an asian man opens the door. The bin man says,
''Hi, sorry to bother you, but where's your bin?'' The asian man looks confused.
''Um, a bin upstairs,'' he says. It's now the bin mans turn to look confused.
''Why is your bin upstairs?'' He asks. The asian man begins to look nervous. His eyes dart from left to right. A single bead of sweat runs down his forehead.
''Um, a was, um, a was on toilet,'' he stammers out loudly. The bin man realises his mistake.
''Right, sorry, I see what's going on. No, I meant to say where's your wheelie bin?'' The asian man sighs and looks at the ground, clearly defeated.
''Okay, you got me,'' he looks up at the bin mans face. ''A bin upstairs masturbating!''
Never date a tennis player Love means nothing to them

- Matt Winning, 2015
What's the difference between a Boy Scout and a guy who fixes bicycle horns? One's motto is 'Be Prepared', the other's is 'Beep Repaired' 


EDIT:I reached r/all, I promised a friend of mine that I would stop calling his mom hot if I reached all. 

He sends his regards... 
I love hyperbole It is literally the best thing ever!
My wife is like the square root of -100... 
A perfect 10, but completely imaginary
So Queen of Englad was bored and summoned an American, a frenchman and a russian... They gather at the palace. The queen says: "Bring me your greatest weapon!". And so they went and came back. The frenchman brought a pistol, the american - an assault rifle while the russian is nowhere to be seen.
 The queen got tired of waiting and said the rest: " now take those weapons and shove them up your arse!"

The frechman takes the pistol and shoves it up no problem, didnt feel a thing

The american is stuffing the rifle as hard as he can and keeps crying and laughing, crying and laughing

The queen asks:" why are you alternating between crying laughing?"

The american answers:" I'm crying because this hurts, jesus fucking christ. I'm laughing because the russian is driving over here with a fucking tank"

edit: forgot some words
"Which hand do you use to stir your coffee?" "My right?"

"How original, I use a spoon"
How do you stop a mole from digging? Take his shovel away
What's Donald Trump's spirit animal? The wall-rus. 

Yes, I do hate myself. 
How many hipsters does it take to screw in a lightbulb? Never mind, it's an obscure number you probably haven't even heard of before.
My American Car... was Made in Mexico.

My Japanese car was Made in America.
The Nun and the Uber Driver One night, an Uber driver picked up a nun. While he was driving, the driver started to laugh insanely.

"Why are you laughing?" asked the Nun
"Oh it's nothing." said the Uber driver
"No really" said the Nun, "I won't mind"
So the driver told her, "Well, it's really silly but I've always had this fantasy of having a blowjob from a nun"
"Well then, what's your name?" the nun enquired.
"Robert"
"Are you married?"
"No"
"Are you Catholic?"
"Yes"
"Then pull into the alley way"
The driver was so stunned he didn't want to give up this chance so he pulled into the alley, when they were finalised they returned to the car.
While driving, "Robert" started to cry.
"Why are you crying?" asked the nun.
"I'm sorry, I lied"
"How so?"
"Well my name is Daniel. I have a wife and three kids and I'm Jewish."
"Well, I've done a bit of lying too" the Nun grinned "My name is Simon and I'm going to a costume party"
I can only mourn something viewed with my own two eyes... As they say, seeing is bereaving.
People think I'm a pervert... People think I'm a pervert because I sleep with a 9 year old. But you have to remember, dog years are 7 times longer than ours. 
So my wife walked into the room while I was having sex with my daughter...... I wasn't sure what she was more freaked out by, the fact that I was fucking our daughter, or that the abortion clinic gave me the fetus. 
Why couldn't the ginger bread man walk? Because he had crummy legs.
Trumps favourite joke. What do sharks and people have in common? 

The only great ones are white. 
How Many Dogs Does It Take to Change a Light Bulb? **Golden Retriever**: The sun is shining, the day is young, we've got our whole lives ahead of us, and you're inside worrying about a stupid burned-out light bulb?

**Border Collie**: Just one. And I'll replace any wiring that's not up to code.

**Dachshund**: I can't reach the stupid lamp!

**Toy Poodle**: I'll just blow in the Border collie's ear and he'll do it. By the time he finishes rewiring the house, my nails will be dry.

**Rottweiler**: Go Ahead! Make me!
      
**Shi-tzu**: Puh-leeze, dah-ling. Let the servants. . .
      
**Lab**: Oh, me, me!!! Pleeeeeeze let me change the light bulb! Can I? Can I? Huh? Huh? Can I?
     
**Malamute**: Let the Border collie do it. You can feed me while he's busy.
      
**Cocker Spaniel**: Why change it? I can still pee on the carpet in the dark.
      
**Doberman Pinscher**: While it's dark, I'm going to sleep on the couch.
      
**Mastiff**: Mastiffs are NOT afraid of the dark.
      
**Hound Dog**: ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ
      
**Chihuahua**: Yo quiero Taco Bulb.
      
**Pointer**: I see it, there it is, right there...
      
**Greyhound**: It isn't moving. Who cares?
      
**Australian Shepherd**: Put all the light bulbs in a little circle...
      
**Old English Sheep Dog**: Light bulb? Light bulb? That thing I just ate was a light bulb?
Two teenagers snuck into a crypt at night. One tripped over a small bone and the other unashamedly laughed. Can't blame him though, it was a little humerus.
Frank the Human Cannonball retired yesterday and has yet to be replaced... The circus owner said, "It's hard to find another man of that caliber."
Nintendo, don't be a Valve Make Luigi's Mansion 3!
I get paranoid when I smoke Sometimes I get paranoid when I smoke, like last time I got so high I convinced myself my girlfriend was sleeping with my bestfriend.

Luckily for me though it was only my second best friend.
A guy dies and wakes up on a beach. Nice weather, hot girls playing beach volleyball, barbeques everywhere, laughter and joy. All of a sudden, Satan comes up to him. "Welcome to hell. Enjoy yourself, have a drink, have a hamburger and check out the area. If you need anything or have a question, feel free to ask me." he says. The guy walks along the beach, has a few drinks with a nice girl. He walks over a hill, when he sees a hole in the ground, full with tormented people, flames rising up from the hole. The guy runs towards the beach until he finds Satan. "Hey, I found this hole and all these people are being tormented... What´s that about?" "Oh," Satan says, "that´s for the Christians, they want it that way."
I lead a pretty rock n roll lifestyle I wake up stoned and roll out of bed
A Scientologist lived alone with his dog for company. When his dog died he asked the Scientologist Minister if he would have a funeral service for his dear dog.
The Minister replied "we can't have funeral services for dogs in the church of Scientology, but the baptists might say something for your dog"
The man said "thank you Minister, do you think $5,000 would be enough to donate to them for the service?"
The Minister replied "Oh dear me, why didn't you say the dog was a Scientologist"
There’s that moment when you put your steak on the grill and your mouth waters all over from that amazing smell. Do you vegans feel the same when you mow the grass?
Pakistani breakup line Boy to Girl: It's not you, it's my goat !
A buddy of mine got sent to jail A buddy of mine got sent to jail and completely lost his shit as soon as he got there. 30-seconds in, he punched another guy, that guy went down, and a huge fight broke out. There was a lot of blood, a lot of swearing, and the whole time my buddy was just swinging wildly and shouting absolute nonsense.



We don't play Monopoly together anymore.

René Descartes walks into a bar.... The bartender asks if he'd like a beer.

"I think not."

and he promptly vanished from existence.
When life hands you lemons.....Make lemonade Then, find someone for whom life has handed them Vodka....
The Sanders/Cruz debate was really weird It was like peeking into an alternate dimension where both parties had hindsight
How many feminists does it take to screw in a light bulb? One to screw it in.

One to excoriate men for creating the need for illumination.

One to blame men for inventing such a faulty means of illumination.

One to suggest the whole “screwing” bit to be too “rape-like”.

One to deconstruct the lightbulb itself as being phallic.

One to blame men for not changing the bulb.

One to blame men for trying to change the bulb instead of letting a woman do it.

One to blame men for creating a society that discourages women from changing light bulbs.

One to blame men for creating a society where women change too many light bulbs.

One to advocate that light bulb changers should have wage parity with electricians.

One to alert the media that women are now “out-lightbulbing” men.
An old farmer wrote a letter to his innocent son in prison: "This year I'm unable to plant potatoes because I can't dig the ground. I know if you were here you would've helped me."

His son replied: "You idiot, don't dig the ground, I have hidden guns there."
Pretty soon, the Police read the letter, and the very next day the ground was dug by the police, and searched for guns but nothing was found. 
The son wrote again: "Now plant your potatoes dad, its the best I could do from here."

Why was the mathematician overweight? Because he ate three squared meals a day 
What's the tallest building in the world? A library, cause it has so many stories
Why do Phish concerts have the best drugs? Because if you're not tripping ballsack you'll realize you paid 45 bucks to listen to cheese eating Vermontians tune their instruments for 6 fucking hours.
If quizzes are quizzical then what are tests? STUPID.
Two antennas met on a roof, fell in love and got married. The ceremony wasn't much, but the reception was excellent.
What did Robocop say to the criminal he's fucking to death? "Dead or alive, you're coming with me."
What's the hardest part when telling a gay joke? Keeping a straight face.
I saw my first coloured movie today One guy was half black and half white and another guy was half white and half black
Why are Marxists good at hiding? Commieflage.
A severely obese man walks into a doctor's office to get his medical results. He waddles his way into the room before he manages to climb up onto the examination table. The room falls silent while the doctor reads through his file. 

"So we did your blood work and I'm sorry to be the one to tell you this...but you have a pretty bad weight problem."

The man sitting on the examination table looks at him with a face of confusion as silence fills the room. He finally answers "...you realize I know that, right? I've been overweight for years. You aren't telling me anything that I don't already know." 

The doctor tosses the man's file onto his desk before cupping his hands over his mouth in momentary thought. "You don't seem to understand the *weight* of your situation so let me attempt to break this down for you. I have been in practice for almost 15 years and you are literally the fattest man who has ever walked into this office. You aren't just fat, you are at a level of obesity that I personally didn't even think was medically possible. The fact that you were able to walk into this office on your own strength alone is a miracle that would make Jesus Christ ask *How'd he do that?* and that guy walked on water. 

When we did your blood work, your blood sugar level was at 500 which effectively makes you a brand of coffee sweetener. I couldn't even take your blood pressure with a normal pressure cuff because of how fat your arms are. I had to jerry-rig a cuff out of the spare tire of my Ford F150. Your cholesterol level came back as Land-O-Lakes. My goal is to try and get that to "I can't believe it's not butter" but even that's a long shot. Your blood was so thick and meaty that we received a call from the blood center asking us why we decided to send them a tube of Ragu to analyze. Are you following me on this or do you need me to give you some more examples?"

The room goes quiet again as the severely obese man stares at the doctor with a face that is beat red from anger. 

"You know what? I didn't come in here to be insulted. I came here to get my medical results from someone who I thought was supposed to be helping me. You may think that you're trying to help me but what exactly are you accomplishing by being such a scumbag about it?"

The doctor goes silent for a moment before finally responding. 

"I was gonna sugar coat it but I was concerned you might eat me."
Crazy times. Republicans silenced Elizabeth Warren. Do you know what kind of power that takes? 
 To silence the world's loudest woman? 
The dentist told me I need a crown. I'm like, "I know, right?!"
A prominent art collector quits the Cabinet immediately after his confirmation He had stumbled into the wrong auction
WARNING to all in the North Side of Chicago, there is a scam taking place! A scam is being pulled, mainly on older men. 

What happens is that when you stop for a red light, a young nude woman comes up and pretends to be washing your windshield. While she is doing this, another person opens your back door and steals anything in the car. 

They are very good at this: They got me 7 times Friday and 5 times Saturday. 

I wasn't able to find them on Sunday.
I screamed my crushes name while having sex with my girlfriend But she didn't care 'cause Mercy isn't our safeword.
What do you get when you cross a Hells Angel with a Jehovah's witness? They come to your door and tell you to fuck off
What's the difference between Japanese sake bars and doctors in Oregon? One of them serves adults in Asia...
When do people have unhappy bowel movements? On sad-turd-days.
A man is driving down the road and breaks down A man is driving down the road and breaks down near a monastery. He goes to the monastery, knocks on the door, and says, “My car broke down. Do you think I could stay the night?”The monks graciously accept him, feed him dinner, even fix his car. As the man tries to fall asleep, he hears a strange sound.The next morning, he asks the monks what the sound was, but they say, “We can’t tell you. You’re not a monk.”The man is disappointed but thanks them anyway and goes about his merry way.Some years later, the same man breaks down in front of the same monastery.The monks accept him, feed him, even fix his car. That night, he hears the same strange noise that he had heard years earlier.The next morning, he asks what it is, but the monks reply, “We can’t tell you. You’re not a monk.”The man says, “All right, all right. I’m *dying* to know. If the only way I can find out what that sound was is to become a monk, how do I become a monk?”The monks reply, “You must travel the earth and tell us how many blades of grass there are and the exact number of sand pebbles. When you find these numbers, you will become a monk.”The man sets about his task. Forty-five years later, he returns and knocks on the door of the monastery. He says, “I have traveled the earth and have found what you have asked for. There are 145,236,284,232 blades of grass and 231,281,219,999,129,382 sand pebbles on the earth.”The monks reply, “Congratulations. You are now a monk. We shall now show you the way to the sound.”The monks lead the man to a wooden door, where the head monk says, “The sound is right behind that door.”The man reaches for the knob, but the door is locked. He says, “Real funny. May I have the key?”The monks give him the key, and he opens the door.Behind the wooden door is another door made of stone.The man demands the key to the stone door.The monks give him the key, and he opens it, only to find a door made of ruby.He demands another key from the monks, who provide it.Behind that door is another door, this one made of sapphire.So it went until the man had gone through doors of emerald, silver, topaz, and amethyst.Finally, the monks say, “This is the last key to the last door.”The man is relieved to no end.He unlocks the door, turns the knob, and behind that door he is amazed to find the source of that strange sound.But I can't tell you because you're not a monk.
How does a quarterback discipline his kids? Intentional Grounding
Why don't squirrels mate in the summer? Because they're storing their nuts for the winter.
Bin Laden said it was ok to masterbate.... I guess they should have called themselves the Tali-whackers. 
Chlorine texts potassium, asking to borrow an electron. Potassium replies, "K"
It's 2018. A student insults his teacher, "without us, you wouldn't have a job!" The teacher looks him in the eye, and says "without your parents' money, you wouldn't have a teacher"
'90s kids won't get this Social security
On a scale of Casey Anthony to Jerry Sandusky How much do you love your kids?
What's the difference between a Republican senator and a prostitute? A prostitute takes your money to fuck you.

A Republican senator collects money from someone else and then fucks your children.
I posted "In the end, I hope Trump is just a bump in the road and we go on about our business" Was answered "yeah, in that case, the line of cars waiting their turn will stretch to the horizon"
Why is there no such thing as a drug sniffing dog ? Because the dog will high at training
What did the Bunny say to the Carrot? I'm going to eat you!
Dear Justin Bieber haters, please respect him I owe him my life. Last year August, i had been in a coma for 6 months. Then one day my nurse turned on the radio to his songs. So i woke up and turned it off..
Why don't women fart? They can't keep their mouths shut long enough to build up any pressure.
Why do guys snore when they sleep on their back Their balls fall over their asshole and the air has nowhere else to go
My husband almost gave me a heart attack when he said "I like my men like I like my coffee...." "and I fucking hate coffee."
The rancher had 196 cows But when he rounded them up he had 200
I can't believe they are still together after all those years of shit Who?
My butt cheeks 
Does anybody know how to get rid of smelly feet? Asking for a foot
My neighbors caught me watching them have sex through their bedroom window and told my parents. My dad made me apologize and told the couple I was normally above that type of behavior. I took the advice and started watching through the skylight.
The Toilet! My wife, Judy, had been after me for several weeks to varnish the wooden seat on our toilet. 

   Finally, I got around to doing it while Judy was out.

After finishing, I left to take care of another matter before she returned.

   She came in and undressed to take a shower. Before getting in the shower, she sat on the toilet.

   As  she tried to stand up, she realized that the not-quite-dry epoxy paint had glued her to the toilet seat.
   About that time, I got home and realized her predicament. 

We both pushed and pulled without any success whatsoever. 

Finally, in desperation, I undid the toilet seat bolts.

   Judy wrapped a sheet around herself and I drove her to the hospital emergency room. 

The ER Doctor got her into a position where he could study how to free her (Try to get a mental picture of this.) 

Judy tried to lighten the embarrassment of it all by saying, "Well, Doctor, I'll bet you've never seen anything like this before."
  

The Doctor replied, 

"Actually, I've seen lots of them I just never saw one mounted and framed."
Just found a hat with a hundred pound in it!!! 
The guy playing the guitar was well jealous that he never noticed it first!
Chased me all the way down the street.

TIL Abraham Lincoln is the only president that cannot be convicted of a crime Because he's innocent.
What do you do if you miss your mother-in-law? Reload.

(Thanks Bob Dylan via Theme Time Radio Hour)
My friend asked me what my sex life has been like in the past..... I said it was like the Bowling Green Massacre :(
Unemployment at its best! An Israeli doctor says: "In Israel, medicine is so advanced that we cut off a man's liver put them on another man, and in 6 weeks, he is looking for work."

The German doctor says: "That's nothing,
in Germany we take part of a brain, put it in another man, and in 4 weeks he is looking for work."

The Russian doctor says: "Gentlemen, we take half a heart from a man, put it in another's chest, and in 2 weeks he is looking for work."

The American   doctor laughs: "You all are behind us. Two days ago, we took a man with no brains, no heart, and no liver and made him President.

Now, the whole country is looking for work!" 
What's the difference between a frog and a horny toad? Frog said ribbit ribbit. The horny toad said rubbit rubbit 
A cop passes out some joints as part of a drug education program A school police officer passes out 3 joints to the teenagers in the classroom. 

He tells them that if he doesn't get them all back, he's putting the whole school into lock down and searching everyone.

When he collects the weed, he only get 2 joints.

Before he starts searching everyone, someone comes up with the weed.

Another kid looks like he's about to say something, but puts his hands back in his pockets and looks around nervously.
What do Spanish people call their young Jewish friends? Amigos Menorahs.

What do Princess Kate and Osama bin Laden have in common? They both had their back doors blown out by a guy in the navy.
I was woken up at 5am by a crow... It just wouldn't stop cawing. After an hour I felt like shooting the damned thing! Then another crow joined it and they started to have a jolly old conversation. I wanted to blow both their heads off! One more crow and there definitely would've been a murder.
Sherlock Holmes and Doctor Watson were going camping. They set up their tent, started a campfire, and laid down their sleeping bags inside of the tent. After a few hours of playing cards and joking by the fire, they extinguished the fire and went to sleep. Holmes awoke Watson in the middle of the night and they looked up at the starry night sky. 

"Watson, look at the sky, what do you see?"

"I see thousands of shining stars, and it's hard to believe how many millions of billions of miles away they are from us." replied Watson.

"And what is else can you infer?" said Holmes.

"Well, if our sun is just a mere star among trillions, then we can safely assume there are billions of planets out there, and planets like Earth. And then life in the cosmos is a possibility."

"Watson, you dumbass, someone stole our tent."

Edit: saw this on a tumblr post and couldn't find it, rewrote it and full credit goes to OP of that post.
What do you call a dog kennel in San Francisco? Luxury apartments
"No" means "NO"!..... Unless she's dyslexic, then **it's ON!**
A man approached Captain Von Trap and said, "No offense, but is that short haired blonde single?" "Nun taken."
A tough, old cowboy walks into a bar with a gun in his holster... He trips upon entering the bar and his gun fires, with the bullet hitting him in the foot. His big toe is taken off, laying on the floor in a pool of blood. 

The cowboy limps up to the bar and asks for a shot of whiskey. The bartender stares at him and says, "You just shot yourself in the foot, go to a doctor!"

The cowboy looks at him and says, "Give me some whiskey, and quit being lacktoes intolerant!"

Edit: spelling
A cop goes up to the window of a car he's just pulled over Cop: "Any drugs or alcohol today?"
Man: "No but I vape"
Cop: "Look pal, I don't give a shit if you're gay, just answer the question."
I tried to start an online bakery. But I accidentally deleted all my cookies.
I just spawned in and instantly died... But isn't that how abortion works?
What comes after 69? Listerine.
What do you get if you cross a Rottweiler and a Labrador? A dog that scares the shit out of you then runs away with the toilet roll.
How much does a hipster weigh? An instagram
Wanna get a pizza and fuck? Guy: Hey, wanna get a pizza and fuck?

Girl: No.

Guy: What? You don't like pizza. 
Make your Betsy DeVos jokes soon.. While people can still read
My buddy and I both have the flu. I invited him over for Netflix & chills.
Why should women stop having children after 35? Because 36 is too many
How is driving a Ford truck similar to visiting Thailand? Either way, you're likely to blow a tranny
If you cited something from Reddit... I guess you could call it Creddit
The trampoline used to be called a jumpoline. They changed the name to Tramponline when my Mother in law got one.
Two cows are eating grass in a field The first turns to the second and says "Moooooo"

The second turns to the first and says "I was just about to say that"
A feminist got mad because I said boys and girls instead of girls and boys I asked what's it matter, I always cum first 
"You snooze, you lose." -Competitive insomniacs 
What's the difference between meeting me in a bar and meeting Bill Cosby in a bar? You'll remember meeting me
Phone Call I was in the public toilets and had just sat down, a voice from the next cubicle said “Hi!, how are you?”
Embarrassed, I said, “I’m doing fine”.
The voice said “So what are you up to?”.
I said, “Just doing the same as you, sitting here!”.
From next door, “Can I come over?”.
Annoyed, I said, “rather busy right now”.
The voice said, “Listen, i will have to call you back, there’s an idiot next door answering all my questions”..
What do Lebron and a gigolo have in common? They've both got a rim-job to do.
Tobacco companies kill their best customers And condom companies kill their future customers
Many people are asking me who I think will win the boxing match between Chris Brown and Soulja Boy, but Chris is the obvious choice as far as I'm concerned. After all I've seen his handiwork years ago and it's not too shabby.
My friend asked me to stop singing Wonderwall I said maybe 
A young morticians apprentice crashes through the door of his mentors office and says excitedly: "Hey Monty! You gotta check out this lady that just came in." Monty slowly gets up from his chair.  
"You know Mike, there isn't much I haven't seen. A lot of bodies have come through these doors."  
"Yeah, but have you ever seen a chick with a shrimp in her pussy?"  
Monty is intrigued. He follows Mike out to the stainless steel table and looks at the cold, naked body of a young woman. The young apprentice points triumphantly at his find.  
"Mike, you'll be disappointed to hear that this is not a shrimp, but is actually this woman's clitoris."  
Mike furrows his brow and looks first unsure, then embarrassed.  
"Well jeez Monty, it sure tasted like shrimp."

I found the simplest, best way to shave You have to use Occam's Razor
I told the Subway sandwich lady not to forget my pickle. It was a big dill
Why was tigger looking in the toilet? He was looking for Pooh.
They say that cows kill more people than airplane crashes... It's true, my ex once chased me with a knife.
Fight Club is the best bromance movie that never happened!
Mr. Trump, did you know Beethoven was deaf? Trump: And how was he able to make all those movies?
What do you call a magical dog? Labracadabrador
9/11 wasn't an inside job because all the employees jumped outside.
Early one morning a son goes up to his dad and asks "What's the difference between a cunt and a pussy?"
Looking a little surprised the dad goes 
"Come with me and I'll show you"
Takes him into his mothers bedroom where she still sleeps and lifts up the sheets.
Dad : you see that, that's a pussy 
Son: can I touch it? 
Dad: fuck no, you'll wake the cunt up 

My uncles told me this. 

Why was the vulture kicked off of the airplane? Because he ate a passenger's carrion!
I totally blew it with my new girlfriend That's how it goes with inflatable partners.
What's the difference between a well dressed man on a bike and a badly dressed man on a unicycle? Attire.
What do penguins do in a race? They peng-win
What do Betsy Devos and the Catholic Church have in common? They may help some, but it's mostly just a bunch of kids getting fucked.
I was suffering from short term memory loss But then I found my ram. 
What do you call a cannon that can't fire properly? Projectile Dysfunction.


I'll see myself out.
My math teacher called me average... How mean
What does the dyslexic cow say? oom
What's the difference between an encyclopedia and a Republican senator? The encyclopedia has a spine.

(Apologies to Senators Collins and Murkowski)
What did the Muslim say to Castro's gay lover? "Stop, you are Infidel!"
What do you and the universe have in common? You both started with a Big Bang.

(I've known this joke for a longtime and I don't remember if I made it)
What do you call interracial Game of Thrones porn? Taking the black 
A man walks up to the pearly gates Saint Peter asks, "How did you get here?"  


The mans answers, "Flu."
Teacher asks class: "use the word Dandelion in a sentence" Teacher asks class: "use the word Dandelion in a sentence"

Jamaican student: "the cheetah is faster dandelion"

*Everyone dies*
Who lives in a pineapple under the sea? Bin Laden
What type of berry can you drink out of? A strawberry.
What do you call a heavy trash can that tips things over? A bin Laden.
What do you call a group of ducks quacking at once in a disorderly fashion? Quack-aphony
Why did Donald Trump blush? He saw the climate changing.
My dad told me to wipe my computer before I sell it. I said, "Why?"

He said, "Because there's cum all over it."
I wanted to take a Chinese cooking class. But looking into it, it seemed like too much wok.
A guy walks into a brothel... A guy walks into a brothel and says to the madam, "I want the worst sex in the place. If she's miserable, I want her".  The madam asks, "Are you crazy sir"?  "No" replies the guy "Just homesick".
Toilet bowls ....  should be higher 
Apparently I'm allergic to Burt's Bees body wash Broke out in hives
This year I got my Valentines Day cards mixed up. My girlfriend thinks I love her and my wife thinks I want to fuck her.
How many citrus fruits does it take to kill a pirate? None.
What do you call a large body of water that's salty and filled with promiscuous women? The Hoecean.
2 Vegans arrive on an Arabian shore They debate wether or to pretend they aren't vegan.

The villagers come and welcome them, they offer food and water.

The first one says he's vegan and that he can't eat meat. The villagers eagerly give him hummus and falafel.

They ask the second one if he is vegan as well. He says that it's fine, he'll eat anything, expecting to be sharing the meal with his friend.

Villagers: Perfect! Happy Eid! Come help us get a goat, you will eat a big meal with us tonight.
Why did the dentist's accountant get arrested? Incisor's trading. 
Falcons Fans (a bit late but...) Falcons fans be like #Notmysuperbowl
How many republicans does it take to screw in a light bulb? Ah, I'll have get back to you on that one...
Why did the fighter jet go to the doctors office? Because it had ejectile dysfunction.
They're finally cracking down on Instagram pages that promote white-supremacy...  or as I like to call them: gram-crackers.
My wife said, "When I die, I want everyone at my funeral to be happy, not sad and depressed." I said, "Don't worry. They will be."
My girlfriend asked me if I'd ever been in a fight and I told her that I hadn't. "You're a pussy," she said. "I once sent a guy to hospital."

I said, "We're talking about fighting, not cooking."
Trump is doing something that no one, in the history of democracy, is known to have done before: He's demanding a recount after he *won* the election.
Guys, the book of Revelation is finally coming true, if you don't belive me, look it up... We've heard the final Trump-Pence.
Soviet joke Three men have to share a hotel room in Chelyabinsk during a congress. Naturally, in the evening, they start drinking. One thing leads to another, and they find themselves telling political jokes. Concerns that any of the others may be KGB informants or that the room may be bugged are readily dissolved in alcohol. Everybody is having a great time.

One is tired and really feels like sleeping; he decides to pull a joke on the others. He excuses himself, runs to the lobby and gives the receptionist a few bills. “Please send someone to my room with a bottle of vodka, some rye bread and salt in ten minutes.” He then returns to the room.

After a few minutes, he notes to the others that stocks of refreshments are running low. “Not to worry, comrades! I have good contacts.”

He leans over towards the potted plant in the corner, grabs it and loudly says, as if speaking into a microphone:

“Comrades at the listening post, this is lieutenant Dyatlov! We urgently require a bottle of vodka, some rye bread and salt to our room! Make haste!”

The others laugh their asses off – until a minute later, there’s a knock on the door and vodka, salt and rye bread is served.

You could hear a pin drop. Our man goes to sleep, enjoying the quiet.

When he wakes up in the morning, the others are gone. A note is left on the table. “Comrade! A couple of your jokes yesterday would easily get you to Siberia! (The one about Stalin’s maid, while hysterical, could get you in front of a firing squad!!!) However, we liked that room service joke so much, we’ll let you off the hook this time. Sincerely, KGB.”
Advanced Medical Science Comparison An Israeli doctor says: "In Israel, medicine is so advanced that we cut off a man's liver put them on another man, and in 6 weeks, he is looking for work."

The German doctor says: "That's nothing,
in Germany we take part of a brain, put it in another man, and in 4 weeks he is looking for work."

The Russian doctor says: "Gentlemen, we take half a heart from a man, put it in another's chest, and in 2 weeks he is looking for work."

The American   doctor laughs: "You all are behind us. Two days ago, we took a man with no brains, no heart, and no liver and made him President.

Now, the whole country is looking for work!"
I told my friend I watched The Two Towers and it was fun I've never seen him get so angry over a Lord Of The Rings film. 
My neighbours love my taste in music. They even call the police to listen it.
Why don't Falcons eat cereal? They lost the bowl
Who's jesus favourite singer Michael bible
I just divorced my wife of six years. It was very amicable. She was the first one to "like" my Facebook status when I indicated I was single again.
First Day of School It was the first day of school and a new student named Pedro, the son of a Mexican immigrant, entered the fourth grade.

The teacher said, "Let's begin by reviewing some American history. Who said 'Give me Liberty, or give me Death?' "

She saw a sea of blank faces, except for Pedro, who had his hand up.

"Patrick Henry, 1775."

"Very good! Who said "Government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth" "?

Again, no response except from Pedro:

"Abraham Lincoln, 1863," said Pedro.

The teacher snapped at the class, "Class, you should be ashamed. Pedro, who is new to our country, knows more about its history than you do."

She heard a loud whisper: "Screw the Mexicans."

"Who said that?" she demanded.

Pedro put his hand up. "Jim Bowie, 1836."

At that point, a student in the back said, "I'm gonna puke."

The teacher glared and asked, "All right! Now, who said that?"

Again, Pedro. "George Bush to the Japanese Prime Minister, 1991."

Now furious, another student yelled, "Oh yeah? Suck this!"

Pedro jumped out of his chair waving his hand and shouting to the teacher, "Bill Clinton to Monica Lewinski, 1997!"

Now, with almost a mob hysteria, someone said, "You little shit. If you say anything else, I'll kill you."

Pedro frantically yelled at the top of his voice, "Gary Condit to Chandra Levy, 2001."

The teacher fainted, and as the class gathered around her on the floor, someone said, "Oh shit, we're in BIG trouble now!"

Pedro whispered, "Saddam Hussein, 2003.
A midget psychic just escaped from prison... She's a small medium at large. 
Well to be Frank... I would have to change my name.
The sign said, "Pay with your phone." Sorry Wendy's, but I think my iPhone7 is worth a little more than your triple baconator.
I saved €1.50 today... Today I came home from work, out of breath and sweaty. My wife asked me what happened, to which I replied, "I saved €1.50 today by jogging behind the bus instead of riding it."
Instead of looking pleased, my wife looked annoyed. "Bloody moron," she said, "if you had jogged behind a taxi you could have saved €20!"
My girlfriend wanted me to treat her like she was special... ...so I got her a helmet and a box of crayons!
What did they call Mozart after he died? A decomposer 

Baddoom-tish 
Optimist vs Pessimist Optimist–the glass is half full

Pessimist–the glass is half empty

Feminist–the glass is being raped
Police officer: "Can you identify yourself, sir?" Driver pulls out his mirror and says: "Yes, it's me."
Around 26 out of 100 people fail at probability theory that's over 60%
I went to Jared But then I saw the prices and decided to buy a ring on amazon.
What do you call a letter from a feminist? Hate male.
I don't know why the Samoa Girl Scout cookies are racially insensitive... because I'm white and I have no problem with crackers.
On my flight to Australia I was asked if I had any criminal records I was confused, because I didn't know it was still a requirement
The price of balloons have been plummeting... Specialists say it's due to inflation. 
What do you get when you drop a piano on a minor? A flat minor
What do you call an official weapon that shoots pieces of music? A canon canon cannon
Education nominee Betsy DeVos wins Senate confirmation vote I kept seeing this in r/news, but I was sure it belonged here......
Seven eight nine. Cinco seis, "Siete! Que haces?!" 
A man walking home at night comes across a drunk fumbling around under a street light. Man: What's going on?

Drunk: I'm looking for my keys.

Man: Did they fall out of your pocket?

Drunk: I don't know but this is where the light is.
The difference between men and women... ...is that after being in a relationship for six months a woman wonders if it's time to say 'I love you' and a man wonders if it time to fart in bed.
Why did the hipster burn his tongue? He drank coffee before it was cool
QUEEN Elizabeth and Dolly Parton die on the same day. QUEEN Elizabeth and Dolly Parton die on the same day, and both go before an Angel to find out if they'll be admitted to Heaven. Unfortunately, there's only one space left that day, so the Angel must decide which of them gets in. The Angel asks Dolly if there's some particular reason why she should go to Heaven. Dolly takes off her top and says, "Look at these, they're the most perfect breasts God ever created, and I'm sure it will please God to be able to see them every day, for eternity". The Angel thanks Dolly and asks Her Majesty the same question. The Queen takes a bottle of Perrier out of her purse, and drinks it down. Then, pees into a toilet and pulls the lever. The Angel says, "ok, your Majesty, you may go in". Dolly is outraged and asked,"What was that all about, I show you two of God's own perfect creations and you turn me down. She pees into a toilet and she gets in! Would you explain that to me"? "Sorry, Dolly says the Angel, but even in Heaven A Royal Flush Beats a Pair No Matter How Big They Are". 

I was exposed to a dangerous amount of gamma radiation. It still hertz.
You know the german translation for irony? JewWorkingForGasCompany
The day I can’t do my job drunk is the day I hand over my keys today was my last day as a school bus driver
What do you call a fly without wings? A walk.
I recently got hit by a car in a funeral procession... It still hearse!
What is a far right-wing conservatives favorite candy? Preppermints.
Bill Clinton has a smart and beautiful wife Let's just hope she never meets Hillary
You know, I don't find the recent super bowl win all that historic... After all, this isn't the first time Atlanta was burned by the north.
i asked a dyslexic kid if he was Team Santa or Team Satan... (NSFW) he told me to go fuck his mother.
Sounds of a countryside Teacher in a class after holidays:

"Children, who has spent the last holidays at a countryside?"

Some pupils says that they have.

"What new sounds have you heard in there?"

"A cow says MOO"

"A cat says MEOW"

"The guy next door says GET THE FUCK OFF THE TRACTOR!"
What is the bestselling bodycare product amongst terrorists? Lip bomb 
An interviewer asked me what my biggest weakness was So I replied "Well I'd say my best strength is my listening skills"
In how many parts does the skull divide? It depends on the strength you use to hit it.
Caught two friends talking shit about me... Oh,did i say talking?I wanted to say taking and on me while i was sleeping
Did your son like his birthday gifts? -Did your son like his birthday presents?

-Oh, he broke every single one of them - the phone, gaming console and even notebook..

-My god! Did he break my gift too?!

-Nope, your fucking hammer is fine.
I asked my wife if she wanted to try a new sex position called the 68. I asked if she wanted to try the 68.

Wife: What's a 68?

Well it's when you go down on me, and I'll owe you one.
Whats the difference between Kleenex and the starship Enterprise? They both circle Uranus searching for Clingons
How many of Donald Trump's Cabinet does it take to change a lightbulb? None. Apparently, they prefer holding meetings in the dark.
The Chinese food was good But I miss my dog
My friend asked what to do when the variable and number are next to each other in algebra. I responded "They multiply"
$1 MILLION IN HEAVEN Joe asked God, "How much is a penny worth in heaven?"
God replied, "$1 million."
Joe asked, "How long is a minute in heaven?"
God said, "One million years."
Joe asked for a penny.
God said, "Sure, in a minute."
What's the difference between your mom and my penis? I don't get turned on when I slam my penis head in a door.
What's the laziest food? Bread. It likes to "loaf" around. 
A man makes a bet with his boss He bets $500 that he can lick his eyeball.

Laughing the boss agrees.

The man takes off a fake eyeball and licks it.

The boss angrily gives him the $500.

The man then bets $500 he can bite his own ears.

The boss pulls his ears to check if the man is wearing any fake ones, then agrees.

The man takes out a set of fake teeth from his mouth and bites his ear with them.

Angry, the boss gives him $500 and tells him to go away.

The next day, the man comes back.

Boss: What now? Didn't you take enough money from me?

Man: Trust me. This one should be easy. I bet you all your money back that you are wearing purple underwear.

Boss: Haha! My underwear is black! 

Man: May I see some proof? 

The boss goes to the washroom and brings back his underwear in his hands.

The man cheerfully hands $1000 to the boss.

Boss: Why are you so happy?

Man: Look around you. All around the office's glass walls your 43 employees are watching.

Boss: And..? 

Man: I bet each of them $500 that I can make you take off your underwear. 
A man works for a company for nearly a decade without getting promoted He decides that he can either start kissing ass and climb the corporate ladder or he can kill himself. 




He chose the latter
What's the worst thing to happen to a banana gun? It gets Jammed
Dorblu A man at a store: 

"Do you have Dorblu cheese"

"What is it Dorblu?"

"Oh, it's a kind of cheese with mold"

"Sorry, we haven't. But we have Dorblu bread and Dorblu sausage"
Trump's Plan... Maybe Trump's real plan is to make Americans so intolerable that the rest of the world doesn't want to cross America's borders.
What do Michael Jackson and Kmart have in common? They both have boys pants 1/2 off.
Me and the wife were talking about sexy role playing when she asked what I'd like to do. I said "Well, we go to a bar separately and pretend we've never met"

"Ooh, then what?" she answered

I said "Nothing, that's it".

What does the travel ban look like at Wal-mart? Well, it's just a small version of regular sized Ban, both the roll-on and invisible solid.
What do you call a russian mall cop? Cyka Blart
How did the Scandinavian countries communicate during WW2? Norse code
I think it's about time we start voting for more politicians with breasts I don't see why not, considering how long we've been voting for complete boobs in the first place.
A teenage boy is getting ready to take his girlfriend to the prom. First he goes to rent a tux, but there's a long tux line at the shop and it takes forever.


Next, he has to get some flowers, so he heads over to the florist and there's a huge flower line there. He waits forever but eventually gets the flowers.


Then he heads out to rent a limo. Unfortunately, there's a large limo line at the rental office, but he's patient and gets the job done.


Finally, the day of the prom comes. The two are dancing happily and his girlfriend is having a great time. When the song is over, she asks him to get her some punch, so he heads over to the punch table and there's no punchline.
I've never gone sailing before, but I want to sail around the world one day... I have a yacht to learn before my trip.
European and American at a urinal A European and American go up to a urinal and start peeing. The European turns to the American and says "Heeey.... American!"

The American shoots the man a dirty look and says "European..."

The other man says "Exactly! How did you know!"

The American says "Well, for starters you're a-peein' on my leg!!!"
A wealthy man owns dozens of island vacation resorts. He has made millions in his investments, and marries a world famous supermodel.

Several years down the road, he is diagnosed with an incurable disease. As time passes, he grows more and more feeble, wasting away.

As he recognizes that his time is near its end, he has his accountant look over his assets, and finds that, with him being bedridden, his wife  has liquedated most of his assets, selling off his resorts to the highest bidder, and keeping the proceeds for herself. The single one remaining is the resort in which he currently resides.

Furious, the dying man uses his business contacts to hire an assassin, deciding to use what is left of his assets to pay for his wife's murder. The assassin will kill his wife, chop her body into separate parts, and mail her to each of his past business rivals.

The assassin arrives, and the man signs over the deed, saying:

"Cut my wife into pieces. This is my last resort."
So a man is at a bar... So there was a guy at a bar drinking and minding his own business. Suddenly, a man walks in carrying a very large duffel bag. He sits down at the bar, and places his bag on the counter. **POOF!** Out popped a little man from the bag who looked around, and then jumped back in the bag. A few moments later he re-emerged from the bag with a smaller (proportionately sized) piano, and began to play it.

Curious, the first guy asks "What's the story behind this guy?"
"Well," the second guy says as he reaches into the bag. "I found this in the woods the other day" he said as he pulled a lamp of sorts from the bag. He said "It houses a genie who will grant anybody just one wish! JBe sure to speak clearly though because he is a little hard of hearing."

The first guy, not taking him seriously spouts out "Well then I wish for a million bucks."
All of the sudden, the bar is instantly *filled* with ducks, ducks everywhere.
"What's with this?!" the first guy asked. "I asked for a million bucks!"
"Oh yeah?" the second guy chimed in. "Do you think I wished for a 9-inch *pianist*?"
I didn't trip I was testing the floors reflexes!
I heard the Obama's just got a cleaning bill from the White House... Apparently they left a huge pile of shit in the oval office.
"What's the difference between an Al-Qaeda base and a Pakistani school?" "I don't know man, I just fly the drone."
Is this subreddit a vaccum? because all the jokes suck. 
Police stop old man. Ron Chestna 89 years of age was stopped by the police around 2 a.m. and was asked where he was going at that time of night .

Ron replied, "I'm on my way to a lecture about alcohol abuse and the effects it has on the human body, as well as smoking and staying out late."
 
The officer asked, "Really? Who's giving that lecture at this time of night?"
 
Ron replied, "That would be my wife."
Rest In Peace, American Education Coming to an end in DeVos't way imaginable. 
I've been seeing this girl for a while, but I had to drop her Someone stole my pair of binoculars 
How many athiests do you need to change a lughtbulb? None. It will be changed by itself.
A smart scientist amd a blonde girl sit down on a plane. 
A very smart man boards a plane and sits down.
A blond girl sits next to him.

He is bored so he says to her

"Let's play a game, I give you a riddle if you cannot find the answer you pay me 5 dollars. If you answer it though you give me a riddle and I don't answer it I'll give you 300$"

She says "OK, I'll go first."

"What goes up a hill on 1 leg and goes down on 2?"

He thinks about it for a while but after about 10 minutes can't find a answer so he Google's it.

Nothing.

He calls scientists and several well educated people. They have no clue.

He, a man of his word gives the 300 dollars to her.


He asks for the answer she shrugs and hands him 5$
A guy walks into a bar He says ouch
My girlfriend thinks I'm incapable of being faithful My wife on the other hand... has a pretty hot sister
Superman flies into a bar [OC] Superman flies into a bar and orders a bottle of whiskey and a large glass to go with it. He pours himself two swift drinks and downs it as fast as he could.

The bartender says "Hey Superman, you look depressed, what's up?"

Superman replies after pouring and downing himself another drink. "Did you know that the average woman's pelvis can only take 200 pounds of pressure before being crushed?"

"No, I didn't, why?"

Superman shudders. "Me neither."
What do you call a fat psychic? A four chin teller 
What do you do with a dead chemist? Ba.



For those of you that are having a hard time, Ba is the atomic symbol for Barium.
What is 10 blocks long and never had sex? The line for the Nintendo Switch
Trump being elected is proof that we never developed time travel. Today I know why we never developed time travel.
My wife left me because I made too many linkin park references oh well, I guess in the end it doesn't even matter.
Know what's weird about Obama kitesurfing? It means there's finally something he has in common with Trump: watersports.
What does a good bar and a woman have in common? Liquor in the front and poker in the back
I used to work as a corset make for about twenty years But I had to give it up, the work was too constraining.
Winter in Poland is like my ex... ...it doesn't know whether to be cold or hot
I'm sick and tired of hearing the US doesn't have Checks and Balances! What do you think the Koch brother's accountants do? 
Home is where your friends are So I'm homeless
A man asks the doctor "Can I take a bath with diarrhea?"
Doctor:"If you could fill the bathtub with it, why not?"
Why can't you starve in a desert? Because of all the sand which is there.
Why is the workplace of a penis dangerous ? Has to work in dark, wet caves, while standing all the time
What is Harambe's favorite spice? CAGE-en spice!
What do you get when you mix a bird, a van, and a dog? A flying carpet
Two drums and a cymbal fall off a cliff. Ba Dum Tshhhh
I can't stand those stupid people who knock on your door and tell you how you need to be "saved" or you'll "burn". Stupid firemen.
Why was Jesus ripped at his crucifixion? Because he was cross-fit!
I ordered a dildo online last week Today it finally came.
When it comes to making a simple, quick dinner, YOU CAN'T BEATRICE! Sorry, you can't beat rice.




(by British Comedian Milton Jones)
Girls used to call me ugly until they saw my wallet. Now they call me ugly and poor. 
There are 10 types of programmers: Those who understand binary and those who don't
They just got rid of the head of the funfair. That's unfair. 
A woman with a long, thick appendage hanging between her legs A young couple are out for a romantic walk along a country lane. 

They walk hand in hand and as they stroll the guy's lustful desire rises to a peak. 

He is just about to get frisky when she says, "I hope you don't mind but I really do need to pee." 

Slightly taken aback by this vulgarity he replies, "OK. Why don't you go behind this hedge." 

She nods agreement and disappears behind the hedge. 

As he waits he can hear the sound of nylon knickers rolling down her voluptuous legs and imagines what is being exposed. 

Unable to contain his animal thoughts a moment longer, he reaches a hand through the hedge and touches her leg. 

He quickly brings his hand further up her thigh until suddenly and with great astonishment finds himself gripping a long, thick appendage hanging between her legs. 

He shouts in horror, "My God Mary ... have you changed your sex?" 

"No," she replies. "I've changed my mind, I'm having a shit instead."
Whom did the Boston Strangler choke last? The Atlanta Falcons.
I'm glad that DeVos was confirmed as education secretary. Now I don't have to worry about my grandkids being able to read some of my dumbest Facebook posts... or anything else, for that matter.
Elephants Never Forget Frank owned a full grown African Elephant and due to the rising costs of living, he found it was getting expensive to feed his pet. 

Frank thought long and hard for a solution and upon watching a circus program on T.V. thought of the perfect scam to make some quick money. 

You see Frank had seen elephants stand on three legs, two legs, and even one leg, but he had never seen a full grown elephant take all four feet off the ground at once. 

So he created a challenge and put it out in the newspapers and T.V. The challenge was for someone to get the elephant to take all four feet off the ground at once without using any device that would actually lift the elephant from the ground such as a crane, hoist, or the like, if successful they would receive a 10,000 dollar cash prize, but the catch was they had to pay 100 dollars to try.

Turned out people came from far and wide, even other countries. Everyone tried everything they could from coaxing to hypnosis to threats, but try as they might everyone failed in their attempt. 

Frank was elated, his scheme was working brilliantly and he was making some nice dough.

One day a blue convertible pulled into the driveway and a man in a leather jacket got out and approached Frank.

"Good afternoon sir, Is it true that if I can get your elephant to take all his feet off the ground at once I'll win 10,000 dollars?"

Frank replied. "Good afternoon to you too sir, yes it is true, but you have to pay 100 dollars per attempt."

The man nodded and agreed. He gave Frank the 100 dollars, walked over to his vehicle and opened the trunk. He pulled out an old fashioned wooden Louisville Slugger baseball bat and walked up and looked the elephant in the eye. 

A few moments later he walked around behind the elephant, took a stable stance and took a home run swing at the elephants testicles that would have made the Babe proud. The elephant trumpeted out and jumped into the air taking all four feet off the ground. 

Frank stood with his mouth gaping open and reluctantly handed the 10 000 dollars to the stranger. The man got into his car and drove off.

A few months later Frank began to get low on funds again. Although his challenge had been won, he had still made a good profit. 

But now he began to try and think of another scam to make even more money, this time, find one that couldn't be accomplished.
So Frank came up with a new challenge and once again put it in the newspapers and on T.V. 

This time he was sure of his challenge. He had seen elephants move their heads up and down but because of their anatomy they couldn't move it from left to right, only twist it left and right. Once again a 10,000 dollar prize was offered, and a 100 dollar fee to try.

So once again people came from far and wide, again even from other countries. Again everything from coaxing to hypnosis to threats were employed but all those who tried failed in their attempt.

One day a familiar blue convertible pulled into the driveway and a man in a leather jacket got out and approached Frank.

"Good afternoon sir. Is it true that if I can get your elephant to move his head from left to right, I'll win 10,000 dollars?"

Frank swallowed hard and replied. "Afternoon sir, yes it is true but you have to pay 100 dollars per attempt."

Once again the man nodded and agreed. He handed Frank the 100 dollars and once again walked over to his vehicle and opened the trunk. He pulled out the same wooden Louisville Slugger baseball bat, still stained with the elephants blood from the first encounter and walked up to the elephant.

He paused and looked the elephant in the eye, a few moments later he asked. "Remember me?"

The elephant nodded it's head up and down "Yes."

"Want me to do it again?"

The elephant shook it's head from left to right. "No."
Original Content I wish I could post this on another sub
Did you hear about the turtle that became a chef and opened his own restaurant? His specialty is slow cooked meals.
How many suh-dudes does it take to change a lightbulb? None, it's already lit fam!
What's the most confusing holiday for black people? Father's Day!
Why did the Jazz performer wear one shoe? It gave him sole.
My girlfriend is breaking up with me because of my vegan diet... By the way, have I mentioned I'm a vegan?
A Boob a Vagina and an Asshole A BOOB, a VAGINA and an ASSHOLE are debating as to who is the greatest of them all

BOOB: I give milk to new born babies and I'm attractive to the opposite sex, that's why I'm the greatest

VAGINA: that's nothing. I give birth to babies and I accommodate the opposite sex, that's why I'm the greatest
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Why are you scrolling down? It's your turn to speak!
I bought my son a trampoline for his birthday... But all the little shit did was sit in his wheelchair and cry. 

PS:Not sure if this one has been on here before or not, a friend told it to me and I thought it should go here. 
Why did the deplorable shoot with his left hand To try and get IN the basket
My apartment has more than nine ants, but my landlord refuses to get rid of them. He claims they have **ten ants' rights**.
I don't see why Obama gave all his speeches behind bulletproof glass.. I know he's black and all but I doubt he'd actually shoot anyone.
What did the green grape say to the purple grape? Breathe dammit, BREATHE!
What do you call a blind dinosaur? Doyouthinkhesaurus
The Past, The Present and The Future walked into a bar. It was tense.
What do sprinters eat before a race? Nothing, they fast.
As an American, you know what really grinds my gears? Not having German Engineering 
I saw a mosquito flying over my head and i caught it Then, I took off its wings and I shouted to it "Go Fly!"
but it didnt fly.
Conclusion: Mosquitoes go deaf when you remove their wings
Where do Palestinians go to have fun at night? The Gaza Strip club.
A Cop is searching for a criminal babysitter. He says, "I am going to search every little crook and nanny."
These Bowling Green Massacre jokes are too soon Out of respect, we should at least wait until it takes place.
ISIS is winning the war By denying US troops visas into territory surrounding the caliphate 
I would only play one handed in the music assessment But then I'd be in treble
I was waiting in line at this restaurant to order some fruit punch. That's it. That was the punch-line. 
Trump's presidency is historic... He's the first president to ever be more concerned about personal insecurity than he is about national security.
What do muslims color with? Qurayons
I was in an airport in South Korea recently, and while shopping, asked the cashier which currency he preferred. A bit agitated, he replied... "The Korean Won!"
A, C, and E walk into a bar. The bartender says, "Sorry we don't serve minors."
You guys hear about the fire at the circus? It was InTENTSe.
A photon walks into a hotel with his luggage... The bellhop asks, "sir, do you need help with your bags?"

The photon responds, "that's alright, I'm traveling light!"
'Knock knock' 'Who's there'

'Okay Google'

'Okay Google, who?'

'Sorry I didn't catch that'

'OKAY GOOGLE WHO?'

'The World Health Organization is a specialized agency of the United Nations that is concerned with international public health. It was established on 7 April 1948, headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. '
What do you call a Communist sniper? A Marxman
Chuck Norris calls a local hardware store.. Chuck: Do you have a rod?
Store guy: Yes.
Chuck: Then shove it up your ass.
*hangs up

The store guy again gets a call from Chuck but the store guy thinks he has got it this time.

Chuck: Do you have a rod?
Store guy: No.
Chuck: Did you shove it up your ass?
*hangs up

After a while the store guy again gets a call and the store guy thinks to himself "No way he is gonna have me this time".

Chuck: Do you have a rod?
Store guy: Yes and no.
Chuck: Are you repetitively shoving it up your ass?
*hangs up

The store guy is furious now.He is so furious that this time he calls Chuck.

Store guy: Do you have a rod?
Chuck: Why? Do you want to shove it up your ass?
How many millennials does it take to screw in a lightbulb? None. Shit's already mad lit, fam. 
A concerned husband goes to his priest... "Father, I think my wife is trying to poison me. Every time she makes me something to eat, the rat poison bottle gets lighter and lighter."

Troubled by hearing this, the priest tells the man, "I will go and speak with your wife and see what is going on here."

The priest then heads to their home and sits down with the wife and has a long discussion. He then comes back to talk to the husband.

"I've spoken with your wife for over 45 minutes about this", the priest said.

The husband looks intently at the priest, "Yeah, what should I do?"

The priest calmly says "you should take the poison."
What's a refugee's favourite song? Welcome to the Jungle
They're going to start letting animals participate in the X Games... They will all have to go through extreme vetting before entering 
I went to the sewer the other day... It was a load of crap.
We didn't elect Harambe for president But we still got a gorilla in office
People claim that in the English language, y can be a vowel but I think that's just a myth
What is the difference between Hyaenidae and a butt on weed? The first are hyenas

The second is a high-anus.
Went to the gym today and cheered everyone on for an hour. On the way out the trainer stopped me... Confused he asked me what I was doing at the gym. So I told him exactly what I was doing:
"Lifting Spirits"
Ray the chicken 

Ray the Chicken
 
Ray came home one night from a long day at work, slid into bed beside his sleeping wife, and fell into a deep slumber.
He awoke before the Pearly Gates, where St. Peter said, 'You died in your sleep, Ray.'

Ray was stunned. 'I'm dead? No, I can't be! I've got too much to live for. Send me back!'

St. Peter said, 'I'm sorry, but there's only one way you can go back, and that is as a chicken.'

Ray was devastated, but begged St. Peter to send him to a farm near his home. The next thing he knew, he was covered with feathers, clucking and pecking the ground.

A rooster strolled past. 'So, you're the new hen, huh? How's your first day here?'

'Not bad,' replied Ray the hen, 'but I have this strange feeling inside. Like I'm gonna explode!'

'You're ovulating,' explained the rooster. 'Don't tell me you've never laid an egg before?'

'Never,' said Ray.

'Well, just relax and let it happen,' says the rooster. 'It's no big deal. He did, and a few uncomfortable seconds later, out popped an egg! He was overcome with emotion as he experienced motherhood. He soon laid another egg - his joy was overwhelming.

As he was about to lay his third egg, he felt a smack on the back of his head, and heard.....

"Ray, wake up! You shit the bed!"

Getting OLD just isn’t what they said it would be!
Why didn't the Soviet Union join WW2 until 1941? They were using Stalin-tactics
Reddit is like cancer Once you've noticed it it really grows on you.
What's the funniest software? Lotus Notes
Don't. Never laugh at your wife’s choices… you’re one of them …
What does the car-loving cowboy say when he meets people? H' Audi
A horse walks into the bar... It neigh's, shits on the floor and walks out, leaving the bar patron's bewildered 
Ubisoft Servers. Thats it.
So as I was serving dinner, my wife asked why we were having Brussels Sprouts, "I thought you hated them, having been forced to eat as a child." "I did," I replied, "but I have been trying to do thing I despised as a child to expand my horizons. Surprisingly, I like Lima beans, and I love naps, of course. "

"Well I am proud of you! What can I do to help you 'expand your horizons'?"

I replied, as nonchalantly as possible, "I am going to need you to fuck my ass".

[Request] Tell me your best bird puns! Giving someone a bird themed gift, what are some puns I can use for the card? (It's not for a birthday, so "happy bird-day" won't work).

New England Patriots are the Super Bowl World Champions I loved the way they destroyed Germany in semi-finals, and embarrassed Rwanda in the final. 
Argon walks into a bar. The bartender says "we don't serve noble gases here."  Argon doesn't react.
Where do the light end up? In prism. xD
I recently saw a video of a girl sitting on various fruit To me, that's fucking bananas
How did Jesus feel after the Romans killed him? How did Jesus feel after the Romans killed him? 
He felt pretty cross.
It was announced yesterday that the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo will make all of its medals from recycled cellphones. Well, they’re going to make the Olympic torch out of a Samsung Galaxy. 
Q: What did the thermometer say to the graduated cylinder? A: "You may have graduated but I've got so many degrees"
The Presidential press corps members were discussing how tired they were of being on Air Force One. "Ugh, our space is too cramped, and I'm sick of listening to him brag! He takes anything as an excuse for self-promotion!"
Said another, "I know! It's all 'we have the best' this, and 'Yuuuuge' that!  I want off!"
"I bet anyone $1000 I'll be off this plane in 30 minutes" said Steve from Huffpo.  The rest of the reporters quickly took him up on the bet.  Just then they were all called to dine with the President.
"How about a blessing?" asked reuters.
" I give the best blessings.  Yuuuge, ask God He'll tell you!"

"This is nice china" said AP

"I make the best deals with China, YUUUGE deals, I'm always beating China!"

"I ran a 5k last weekend" said The Chicago Sun Tribune.

"I play the BEST hardball with Iran, I'm making YUUUGE demands!"

"I'm having trouble with the ketchup.  Hey Trump, can you give me a *hand*?"

As he floated to earth with his parachute, Steve wondered how he would collect all that money from his bet with the press pool.








Verbal skills study "A study in the Washington Post says that women have better verbal skills than men. I just want to say to the authors of that study: Duh." --Conan O'Brien

My dick is like Stan Lee I know he'll appear, but i don't know when and when I notice it's already too late.
Give a man a jacket... And he'll be able to leave the house.

Teach a man to jacket, and he'll never leave the house.
Gave my friend in a wheelchair 3 hits of molly last night He's still rollin' this morning
My family and friends always told me I was an 'artistic person'. Finally got a hearing aid and... 

well... 

let's just say that was *not* what they were trying to tell me.
My wife made coffee this morning and I ended up with a piece of coffee bean in my teeth at the weekly department meeting. My lawyer has informed me this qualifies as grounds for divorce.
My brother told me to stop acting like a flamingo. I had to put my foot down.
Why did the chicken walk into the light? To get to the other side.
Johnny is on his grandpa's farm in the rabbit enclosure Johnny is on his grandpa's farm in the rabbit enclosure. The ground is covered in rabbit droppings. Johnny asks, "What are all of the pellets on the floor grandpa?"

His grandpa replies, "Oh those? Those are smart pills. You eat them and you get smarter."

Johnny likes the sound of that so he grabs a large handful of them and shoves them into his mouth, "Yuck! Grandpa, these taste like crap."

His grandpa replies, "You're getting smarter already."
Simple mathematics A college math professor and his wife are both 60 years old.

One evening the wife comes home and finds a note from her husband that says, "My dear, now that you are 60 years old, there are some things you no longer do for me. 

I am at the Holiday Inn with my 20-year-old student. Don't bother waiting up for me."

He returns home late that night to find a note from his wife: "You, my dear, are also 60 years old and there are also things I need that you're not giving me. So I am at the Motel 6 with one of your 20-year-old students.

 Being a math professor, I'm sure you know that 20 goes into 60 way more than 60 goes into 20. So, don't you wait up for me." 

Job Interview: Mental Asylum A newly graduated Psychiatrist goes to an interview at a Mental Asylum....

"So you're interested in coming to work for us here? Tell me what is your experience with mentally deranged people?"

"I've been on Reddit for nearly 6 months now"

"You're hired!"
My wife told me that I twist everything she says to my advantage. I take that as a compliment.


Old School Friend I called an old school friend and asked what  he was doing now. He replied that he was currently working on:

*Aqua-thermal treatment on ceramics, aluminium and steel under a constrained environment*

I was impressed......

On further enquiry, I learnt that he was washing dishes, with hot water under his wife's supervision. 


Alternative phrases to "Calm your tits" * Soothe Your boobs
* De-stress your breasts
* Undo the calamity that is your mammaries 
* adjust your bust before it combusts
* Give that chest a rest
* Hakuna your tatas
* Dont have a rack attack
* Bring peace to your bosoms
I was very naive sexually My first boyfriend asked me to do missionary and I buggered off to Africa for six months

- Hayley Ellis, 2012
What's a revolutionist's favourite pastry? Coup d'étart
Husband & his wife went for Divorce at court. 

Husband & his wife went for Divorce at court. 
Judge : U have 3 kids...How will u divide them?
He had long discussion with his wife & said " Ok, sir We will come next year with 1 more kid" 

Joke doesn't end here....
9 months later....They got twins
What's a vampiric hummingbird's favourite drink? Necktar
On my way for the latest Porsche presentation.. the airport officials requested the purpose of my flight.  
I wrote down "I'm here for the newest 911".  
Best regards from Guantanamo.
My girlfriend asked me not to kill a spider, but said I should take it out instead. I'm getting really sick of her sending these mixed messages.
Why did Pygmalion's girlfriend break up with him? Because he took her for granite.
Teddy Bears never feel Hungry Why the Teddy bears never feel hungry?
Because they are always stuffed!
How did the hipster burn his mouth? He drank P.B.R. before it was cool.
do you understand your right breast is hanging out of your shirt A blonde was walking down the street. A policeman was walking the opposite way. "Hmmm," he wondered, "It looks as if that lady's right breast is hanging out of her shirt." As he got closer, he realized it was. He approched her. He said, "Ma'am, do you understand your right breast is hanging out of your shirt?" She replied, "Oh shit. I left the baby on the bus!" 


The Red Man There was once a man who absolutely loved the colour red. Everything he owned was red. His house, his walls, his shoes, his fridge, everything. 

Because of this obsession, he was a huge fan of sunbaking - not the tanning kind, the burning kind. He did love the colour red.

Not only this, he always did it in the nude; to become as red as possible, of course.

One day as he was sunbaking, a man was hit by a car at an intersection down the road.

The moral of the story is to never cross the road when the red man is flashing.

What do the Atlanta Falcons and a white noise machine have in common? They both make artificial fan sounds.
My wife just got back from her OB/GYN appointments. He told her she cannot have sex 6 weeks. I said, "That's fine but what did your dentist say?"
Police: Come out with your hands up! Police: Come out with your hands up!

Me: I'm gay.

Police: So brave...
I'm going to buy my Dungeon Master a goldfish So I can carp a DM
No just up to my boobs... Milkman brings milk to blondes door. [old times,1950] notices, note, says please i need 5 gal. today to take a milk bath.in dismay Man rings bell. Blonde in robe opens door,milkman says "5 gal mam ,dont you mean 5qts." She says no gallons, "I'm taking a milk bath today." The milkman asks "Ok how would you like that pasturized?" Woman replies, "No just up to my boobs!" 


What would you find inside a billion year old ice planet on the other side of the universe? One of my wife's hairs
A horse in a bar A horse is standing at the bar when a man walks up to him.

"Why the long face?" he asked jokingly.

"I'm stage four terminal and my wife left me, taking everything with her."
What did Whitney Houston say when asked which parts of public buildings are generally the most affectionate? Hallways love yooooouuuuu.
I saw my girlfriend shoving a calculator up her vagina. I said, "What the fuck are you doing? You look like you're in agony."

She said, "It's what's inside that counts." 
Do you know today the world is celebrating "Safer Internet Day" If you're celebrating too, stay away from porn and other internet nasties :D
Why can't Chinese people see? Cause they must get 'A'!
What makes a chicken sneeze? Boog boog  boog  bogaaa
Good, bad, worse Good: I slept with my teacher after prom last night. 
Bad: I was home schooled. 
Worse: by my dad. 
One by one, a class of fifth-graders were called on to make sentences with words chosen by their teacher. Nick didn't often participate in class, so his teacher was glad when she saw him raise his hand to give it a try. 

"Nick," said the teacher, "make a sentence with the words 'defeat,' 'defense,' 'deduct,' and 'detail.'"

Nick thought for a few minutes then smiled. He shouted, "Defeat of deduct went over defense before detail!"
Dog in heat Her dog was in heat, but she agreed to look after her neighbor's male dog while the neighbor was on vacation. She had a large house and she believed that she could keep the two dogs apart. However, as she was drifting off to sleep, she heard awful howling sounds. She rushed downstairs and found the dogs locked together and unable to disengage, as frequently happens when dogs mate. Unable to separate them, and perplexed as to what to do next, and although it was very late at night, she called her vet, who answered in a very grumpy voice.

After she explained the problem to him, the vet said, "Hang up the phone and place it down alongside the dogs. I will then call you back and the noise of the ringing will make the male lose his erection and he will be able to withdraw." 

"Do you think that will work?" she asked. 

"Just worked for me," he replied.
Metal fans don't rest in peace, they RUST in peace.
Why you shouldn't you buy Russian underpants ? Coz Cher-nob-il fallout ! 
What would people from 1000 years ago say... If you told them in the future you'll be able to travel and communicate with people around the world near instantly.

"You mean across?"
A Russian man is driving with his wife and small child. A militia man pulls them over and makes the man take a breathalyzer test. "See," the militia man says, "you're drunk." The man protests that the breathalyzer must be broken and invites the cop to test his wife. She also registers as drunk.

Exasperated, the man invites the cop to test his child. When the child registers drunk as well, the cop shrugs, says, "Yes, perhaps it is broken," and sends them on their way. Out of earshot the man tells his wife, "See, I told you it wouldn't hurt to give the kid five grams of vodka."
What's pink and covered in cobwebs? Maddie McCann's bike. 
I tried selling drugs once. I tried selling drugs once. The guy asked me for some coke and I paniced and asked him if Pepsi was ok. 
My Girlfriends asked me why the Body cells go through Meiosis and why her textbook sexualized them. I replied "Sex Cells."
What do you call the swine who like children? Pigofiles 
What did Mexican Fozzie Bear say? "Oaxaca, oaxaca, oaxaca!"
Why shouldn't you write with a dull pencil? Because it's pointless. IT'S POINTLESS.
How many kids with ADHD does it take to change a light bulb? Let’s go play on our bikes.
A guy was playing golf. A guy was playing golf one day and he got lost. He saw a lady up ahead of him and went to her and said, "Can you please help me, I don't know what Hole I'm on."
She told him "You are one hole behind me. I'm on 7; you're on 6."
He thanked her and continued playing golf.
Later, he got lost again. He saw the same lady and went to her again kind of embarrassed.
"I'm sorry to bother you again but I'm lost; can you please tell me what hole I'm on."
She told him, "You are one hole behind me. I'm on 14; you are on 13."
Again, he thanked her and continued playing golf.
When he finished he saw her in the clubhouse. He went up to her and asked if he could buy her a drink for helping him out. She accepted. As they were drinking and talking, he asked her what she did for a living.
"I'm in sales," she said.
He replied, "No kidding; so am I."
"What do you sell?" She responded that it was too embarrassing to tell; but after he kept pleading to know what she sold, she finally said that she would tell him if he promised not to laugh. He promised.
She said, "I sell sanitary napkins."
He immediately fell to the floor laughing hysterically. She said, "You promised you wouldn't laugh".
He replied (still with tears in his eyes), "I'm sorry, but I couldn't help it. I sell toilet paper..... I'm still one Hole behind you." c",)
Why was the T-Rex angry? His arms were too short to sarcastically slow clap this terrible joke...
I like my women like I like my coffee... Ground up and in the cupboard.
As a German, you know what really grinds my gears? Nothing. Our engineering is perfect.
Presidential monster Remember guys, Steve Bannon is the President. 
Trump is the name of his monster. 
If a Jew gets a new phone... Can they use their own number???
I introduced my girlfriend to my family My wife did not like her.
How do you know that Frank was an honest person? Whenever anyone tells the truth, they are either Frank or doing it like Frank.
Childhood Nursery Rhyme Old Mother Hubbard, went to her cupboard to fetch her poor dog a bone...
But Rover took over, and he bent her over, and gave her a bone of his own
What public official is most prone to giving their stuff away? A sheriff.
big brother is watching you... and he is bored!
What do Donald Trump & the iPhone 7 have in common? They both come with force touch
Which one is heavier? A tonne of rocks or a tonne of feathers? 


The answer? Its a tonne of feathers because you also have to carry the weight of what you did to all those poor birds...
Superman is horny Superman is randy as hell he needs to get laid in the worst way.  Lois has been holding out and he needs a woman.

Superman figures, fuck it, I'm super-sonic.  I'll drop a nut on someone light speed and they'll never know.

So he's flying around and passes by Wonder Woman's apartment.  Intriguingly enough, she is naked, alone, and writhing in her personal ecstasy.  It's summer, her window is open...

Superman can't resist.  At the speed of light, before she'll know anything, he's "in and out".

Back in the Fortress of Solitude,  a somewhat calmer Superman murmurs to himself "A Superman has to do what he needs to."

Meanwhile, Wonder Woman rolls of her her couch and exclaims "holy shit, that that was the best ever"

The Invisible Man responded "Yeah, but my ass is killing me"
Kid #1: I wish I had been born 1,000 years ago. Kid #2: Why is that? Kid #1: Just think of all the history that we wouldn't have to learn.
Obama and Mike Pence are playing tennis While playing tennis with Mike Pence, Obama gets angry and every time he misses he screams "God dammit I missed!" 
This goes on for a while until Mike Pence yells "If you use the lords name in vain one more time a lightning bolt will come from the sky and strike you" 
They continue playing until Obama misses again, he screams "God dammit I missed!" 
In that moment a lighting bolt comes from the sky and strikes Mike Pence, he dies on the spot. A couple of seconds later a voice from above the clouds says "God dammit I missed." 
Why would New Zealand starting a war against Australia be historical? It would be the first time New Zealand declared anything against Australia.
The KGB, the FBI and the CIA are all trying to prove that they are the best at catching criminals The Secretary General of the UN decides to give them a test. He releases a rabbit into a forest and each of them has to catch it.
The CIA goes in. They place animal informants throughout the forest. They question all plant and mineral witnesses. After three months of extensive investigations they conclude that the rabbit does not exist.
The FBI goes in. After two weeks with no leads they burn the forest, killing everything in it, including the rabbit, and make no apologies: the rabbit had it coming. The KGB goes in. They come out two hours later with a badly beaten bear. The bear is yelling: “Okay! Okay! I’m a rabbit! I’m a rabbit!”

My girlfriend just split up with me. She kept crying and saying that I spend too much time on the internet.


Jokes on her, there are hundreds of hot singles in my area looking to hook up. 
Have you seen any of Stevie Wonder's music videos? He hasn't.
Are you serious No, I'd have to change my name for that
An infectious disease walks into a bar.  Barman says, “we don't serve your type here”. Infectious disease replies, “well, you are not a very good host.”
Getting married before the age of 25 Getting married before the age of 25 sounds a lot like leaving a party before 10 PM to me.
Kids on social media nowadays are so selfish. It's always meme meme meme.
What was the hardest question on Timmy's homework last night? 69d.
What brand of glasses do short-sighted dyslexic nymphomaniacs wear? FCUK
Why do people fall in love with pavements? Because they touch our soles.
Trump is just like the rest of us Melania puts his pants on one leg at a time
I think people are underestimating the effect of fruit on the human race. I mean come on, people all across the US are rioting because of a fucking orange.
With all the negativity in the world today... ...at least Charlie Sheen is staying positive.
I was told it was racist to use "welsh" when someone won't pay a bet. They said to use "renege". So I called them a bunch of renegers instead.
My dog ran away this morning. I walked around the neighbourhood looking and calling his name for an hour but still couldn't find him.

My wife said I should look harder, so I shaved my head and got a couple of tattoos.  Still can't find the fucking dog....
(An original) I'll always get in a fight with someone with dwarfism.... We just don't see eye to eye.
Two nuns, Sr Mary and Sr Patricia, are driving down a dark forest road, late at night... When all of a sudden a vampire jumps out in front of their car. Sr Mary screeches on the brakes and says to Sr Patricia: "Quick! Get out and show it your cross!"


Sr Patricia steps out of the car and yells "Oi! Get off the fucking road you stupid cunt!"
The Story of Mike Doe! Hey, my name’s Mike Doe, and this is my story. I had a friend in college, my freshman roommate, who was always talking about his family. His name was Robert Gooding, and he must’ve had a family tree that started from Adam and Eve. Every single day he would drone on and on about some cousin or uncle or some such. He would always burst into the room saying things like, “Hey Mike! You’ll never guess Uncle Nate and Aunt Ridley are doing in Taiwan for the orphans this week!” I remember him talking about how Dimitri, his mother’s grandfather’s nephew’s son, which is apparently what second cousin once removed means, had resolved a tense hostage situation in Iran. And how cool Auntie Pauline (actually a distant cousin) was for working on top secret stuff with the CIA. I always tried to be patient with him and at least pretended to listen and nod at his stories. They never seemed to be about the same people. Sometimes he’d mention something that was actually funny or interesting too so it wasn’t always bad.

Good old rambling Robert. He picked up that nickname within a couple weeks of starting school--I don’t think he liked it much. He didn’t make many friends because he could never stop talking about his own family. Sometimes I think that I was the only one he could talk to who wouldn’t start running after five minutes. I’m not going to lie though. Back then I endeavored to be out of the room most of the day to avoid his ramblings. However no matter how late I came back, he was always up and ready to tell me something new about his family’s latest adventures.

There was this one time that was different though. On a day close to the end of our first semester together, he suddenly stopped his rambling and stared at me with a really serious expression. The abrupt lack of background noise startled me from the article I was reading while humoring him, and when I saw his face I thought he must have been angry with me for ignoring him. “You know Michael,” he started as I prepared my apology, “I really appreciate that you listen to my stories every day. I know it must be boring and annoying for you, but you listen anyway and I appreciate that. So I want to promise you something. Us Goodings, we don’t forget stuff like this. We take care of our friends. Just you wait, one day me and the whole family will find a way to thank you.” I shuddered at the thought of having to attend a graduation party with his entire family and hear about all their adventures first hand, but at that moment I realized that Robert was actually a pretty good guy.

Our year together came to an end, and the next year I was assigned a different roommate. Rambling Robert still sent me emails to keep me up to date with all his family happenings for a while, but even those stopped when he decided to transfer out to some college in Washington. I completed my degree in criminal psychology and went on to work as a detective for the DEA for a while. I had a great time there busting drug dealers and cleaning up the streets of my hometown, and my mom was so proud to have a real Officer Doe in the family. I was about 45 years old when they promoted me and had me relocated near the Mexican border to work on the drug traffic coming from the cartels. It was there that I finally met one of Robert’s infamous family members, Randall Gooding. He was my new supervisor, and when I showed up on the first day he greeted me like an old friend. He told me that he recognized my name and background from the stories Robert had told him, and he personally requested that I be sent down. I was surprised that Robert even talked about me, we had only known each other for a year, but it was nice to reminisce about the Goodings again. Randall was just as talkative as Robert was, and we hit it off almost immediately. It felt like I was in college again. His nickname around the office was Rambling Randy, which had me chuckling for at least a day. Robert, it turns out, was doing just fine. He was a doctor now somewhere in Texas, and I was happy that my old friend was able to make such a good life for himself.

Work was good for a few years until the cartel activity started to pick up dramatically. Nobody was sure why but we were suddenly inundated with arrests and busts and all kinds of paper work. Even Randy wasn’t as talkative around this time. It was all supposed to come to a head today. Today we were going to do a massive takedown on a processing plant operating just inside the border. Our undercover agent had uncovered it while posing for a different case so Randy and I took the lead while the rest of the office continued monitoring the other operation. We enlisted the FBI and local SWAT teams for help and I thought everything was going to go smoothly until I got kidnapped right out of the parking lot on my way out of the office last night.

From the time they ripped the rucksack bag off of my head till the first rays of daylight, they questioned me. They were careful. All of them had clown masks on, the hard plastic kind that never quite fit the face right. All of them were wearing gloves and carrying weapons--some had guns, some had various wicked modifications of baseball bats and crowbars. The night was rough. They wanted to know how we found out about them, who we were working with, when the operation was going to go down, and a whole host of other questions. I was patient and waited. I gave them no information and suffered a few broken ribs and some teeth for it. While they were questioning me, I took in my surroundings. I knew from the floor plans I had studied for the bust that I was in the processing plant, specifically in one of the raised offices at the end of the building. I could see the entire plant from the large window on the wall in front of me. I guessed that they did not know about our plans yet, so I contented myself to sit tight and wait for the bust to happen at 10AM.

However, it was around 6AM when I heard the sirens blaring in the distance. Maybe they stepped up the schedule when they found out I was kidnapped, I thought. My captors were awake in an instant and took up the preplanned positions we had predicted. One of the guys carrying what looked like an M16 came cursing into the office where I was being held. After cracking me in the face with the butt of the gun, I felt more than heard him raise the muzzle level with the back of my head. Soon I heard an unfamiliar voice yell over a megaphone giving the normal spiel about being surrounded and to give up. Of course they refused to give up and began to use me as a bargaining chip. Randy’s voice came over the megaphone just before the first officer continued the negotiation, “Mikey! Just wait Mikey! Hang tight and don’t do anything stupid.”

The standoff lasted for hours. If it weren’t for the gun pressed on the nape of my neck, I would have probably passed out from boredom. Eventually things got real quiet. My guard started getting antsy and walked out--probably to check for new orders with his superiors. As soon as he left the room, a hundred glass windows shattered breaking the silence and raining shards of glass down on the main factory floor. White smoke obscured the first floor as tear gas flooded the facility. Shouting and gunfire followed as my captors opened fire. Amid the confusion and smoke I couldn’t tell who was winning. I did hear Randy’s voice at one point yelling orders like, “Dimitri, take the stairs and give Pauline some cover.” None of the officers who were supposed to be with us today were named Dimitri or Pauline. The din began to wither after only a few minutes and unseen officers began yelling, “Clear!” As the smoke dissipated, I expected to see the body armor and face masks of the SWAT teams who were supposed to be part of today’s operation. Instead I saw lots of men and a few women I had never seen before in various uniforms. Some were in army uniforms others were in suits, and there were even a few in civilian clothes. God, did they call the Army and CIA in on this? When Randy saw me, he came running up with one of the suited men who was carrying a bag.

“Mike! Thank God you’re still alive. I’m sorry we made you wait so long, but we had to wait for all the flights to make it before we could move.”

“What? What flights? Randy, what are you talking about?”

“We found out you were kidnapped at about midnight. The team that we were going to use wasn’t trained for hostage situations so I had to improvise. I made some calls around and got as many as I could to come down here. Good thing Nate here happened to have hostage experience. Nobody asked any questions after I brought your name up, we all know you thanks to Robert here.” He motioned at the suited man who was leaning in to assess me.

I frowned at the man and suddenly realized that his bag contained medical supplies. “Robert?” I choked the question out in disbelief. He just gave me a small smile while he continued his work. “You mean to tell me that all of these guys… They’re all your family?”

Robert looked up from where he was examining my jaw with a wry smile, “I told you we don’t forget Mike. All the Goodings come to Doe’s who wait. ”
A man has been admitted to hospital after shoving 6 toy horses up his arse. Doctors have described his condition as stable.
I just ate a frozen apple! Hardcore.
I have a new theory on inertia but it doesn’t seem to be gaining momentum
Scumbag Steve, when told the babe at the party had Herpes Zoster on her head, asked "Do the shingles match the carpet?"
SKY DIVING LESSONS An idiot was taking sky-diving lessons. The instructor explained that it was time for his first jump, and all he had to do was jump from the plane, count to six, and pull the rip cord. A truck would be waiting for him in the field where he would land.
The man jumped from the plane when he was told to, and counted to six. When he pulled the rip cord, the parachute wouldn't open. He tried the reserve chute and that didn't open.
Frustrated, he muttered to himself as he fell, "I'll bet the damn truck won't be waiting for me either.
What is the funniest bird alive? A Hahastrich! 
What is Whitney Houston's favourite type of coordination? HAND EYEEEEEEE
Banned oranges... It's 2021 and I went to the supermarket to buy some oranges but couldn't find any. I went to another one but there were no oranges again...

I asked the store manager what's the matter 

He said "Trump banned all the Muslims for what some of them did so the new president banned all the oranges for what one of them did".
What do you call Batman running out of church? Christian Bale
How do u reanimate a corpse? Abra Cadavera!
How do Mexicans cut their pizza? "Little Cea-sars"
Trump really needs to do something about all these Canadians. Seriously, geese are the worst.
Why did the Sovereign Citizen cross the road? ITS NONE OF YOUR BUSINESS! AM I BEING DETAINED?!
Third times the charm... ...said god before he accidentally created down syndrome.
I like my women like I like my jeep Topless and easy to get into.
Pretty sure I have mites! Cell: "I'm itching all the time and I can't stop. Pretty sure I have mites!"

Doctor: "You are a cell. Individual bodily cells don't have mites."

Cell: "Pretty sure I have mites!"

Doctor: "Look, we've run the tests. You don't have mites!"

Cell: "Are you sure?"

Doctor: "As I explained on your last three visits, what you have is a severe case of mitochondria!"
What will be the most profitable career in 2017? Mexican ladder salesman.
What's Scooby Doo's favorite chocolate? Fe rrer ruh-roh cher
Sentence from a schoolboy's weekly composition class essay - "My cat just had seven kittens. They are all communists". Sentence from same boy's composition the following week...  - "My cat's seven kittens are all capitalists". Teacher reminds boy that previous week he had said the kittens were communists. "But now they have opened their eyes" replies the child.
So the horse walked into a bar ... and the bartender said, "Say fella, why the long face?"
A black guy in a library asked me where the colored printer was I replied: "Go use the one in the back you nigger"
How many police officers does it take to change a light bulb? None, they just beat the shit outta the room for being black..
When I see lovers' names carved into a tree I don't think it's sweet. I just think it's surprising how many people bring a knife on a date.
What word is used to describe a plant's range of emotions? Chlorofeels
How many psychiatrists does it take to screw in a light bulb? Only one, but the light bulb has to want to change.
How many feminists does it take to screw in a light bulb? Twelve:

One to screw it in.

One to excoriate men for creating the need for illumination.

One to blame men for inventing such a faulty means of illumination.

One to suggest the whole “screwing” bit to be too “rape-like”.

One to deconstruct the lightbulb itself as being phallic.

One to blame men for not changing the bulb.

One to blame men for trying to change the bulb instead of letting a woman do it.

One to blame men for creating a society that discourages women from changing light bulbs.

One to blame men for creating a society where women change too many light bulbs.

One to advocate that light bulb changers should have wage parity with electricians.

One to alert the media that women are now “out-lightbulbing” men.

One to just sit there taking pictures for her blog for photo-evidence that men are unnecessary.
Why is it always a good idea to wear 'tall pants'? Because it's a practice of good high-jean!
How do you spell DEATH? A-va-da Ke-da-vra!
It's not okay to just punch a nazi in the face You're supposed to finish the job
What's a small black dot between two larger white ones? A flea with cotton wool in its ears.
A flight attendant sees a suspicious couple on board... She decides to report it to the pilot immediately.  

"Sir, I think we have a case of human trafficking!  The female passenger looks pretty frightened and the man she is with looks dangerous!"

The pilot responds, "Patricia, I've told you before. This is Air Force One..."
What do crows drink in the morning? CAWWWWWW-FEE!
My Gf's ponytail always comes undone when we're together Oh well, I guess it just comes with the *hairritory*.
Just became a fan of Adele She had me at Hello
What do you get when rabbis eat too many carrots? Orange juice.
What do you call a dog with seven legs that can't walk right? Severalpawsy 
What did Melania say to Donald right after sex? Honey, I'll be home in 30 minutes.
Four gay guys walk into a bar Bartender says,"Sorry, only one unoccupied stool at the moment."

Gay guy says,"That's completely fine." 

Gay man proceeds to turn the stool upside down and each of them sits on a leg.
My wife recently won the Annual Women's Golf Meet in our district Needless to say, I have started calling her the "Intercourse Champion of the County "
How are OP's Mom and Velour alike? they both take several days to dry out
If you're feeling cold, go stand in the corner. It's 90 degrees there.
What do you call a horny midget? An extended version of The Hobbit. 

Did you hear about the otter that begged a beaver to build him a dam? The beaver did not give a barrier that impounds water or underground streams
I love my doctor He told me I only had 3 months to live. 

I said "thanks for letting me know, doc; but I'm sorry, I don't know how I'll be able to pay you."

So he got me six more months. 
I'm completely OK with peeing in the shower.. It's only natural to have a little come out when you're having a poo.
Why didn't the oven get its TV show green lit? Because the pilot light was out.
A giant mushroom attempts to enter a bar... and is stopped by the bouncer. The bouncer says we'll have none of your sort in here tonight. The mushroom says, "Why not? I'm a fungi!"
Are you an ass man or a tits man? I ass myself that every day. Tits a bit hard to figure out. 
What do you call a russian cow? Mos-cow
The mexican magician was at his gig... He said to the audience: "on the count of 3 i will disappear. Uno... Dos..." and he vanished without a Tres
My local ski resort was ripped off last week for around $900. The robber stole a burger, two beers, and some chips.
If Trump was a spy in the Vietnam War, what would his code name be? Agent Orange
I accidentally misidentified my friend's pet bird It was hawkward.
I would tell you all an anus joke.. Butt fuck it.
What do you call a smart blonde? A Golden Retriever.
Our anniversary is coming up, so my wife told me that she would be happy as long as I get her something with a lot of diamonds in it. She will love this pack of playing cards.
Tom Brady has 6 of the most desired rings in the world 5 are from the Super Bowl
The problem with Donald Trump is... He never learned harass was one word.
Why don't kleptomaniacs get puns? They always take things literally.
I promised my mom I would never get raped I said I would always consent. 

She said no one would want to. 
How much does a polar bear weigh? Enough to break the ice. Hi I'm Joe and I eat ass.
What was Hitler's philosophy on PR? Weimar your reputation when you know you're in the Reich!
What do you call a guy who urinates bug spray? Pissed OFF!
Super Bowl 51 will go down as the Gettysburg Address of the NFL Four score and 20 minutes to go.....
Why is Donald Trump like Jesus?? He'll never be as good as his Daddy.
My friend looked at my pregnant wife and said: "I wonder if it isn't really hot in there, for the baby" I replied: "It's likely womb-temperature."
How did Captain Hook die? He wiped with the wrong hand
What does 'mine shaft' mean to a German? His Penis
What is a frisky Optimus Prime called? An autothot.
If foreigners are upset to have had their visas cancelled... Why don't they just apply for MasterCards instead?
What is Trump's Cabinet called? The Insane Clown's Posse.
My girlfriend accused me of cheating I told her she sounded like my wife 
What did the cannibal do after he dumped his girlfriend? Wipe his butt.
What did the cannibal say when he ate a clown? "That tasted funny."
An inmate at my work threw his food down onto his tray. "Now I know why people turn gay in prison..." "...I'd rather lick another man's butthole than eat this crap." 

I died.
Q. How many Trumpies does it take to change a lightbulb? A. Five. 
One to write the executive order, 
one to get it signed, 
one to announce it to the press, 
one to provide the alternative facts, 
and one to call Obama to ask him how.

(Edit: Friend told me this joke and I said I would post it for her)
Jokes from a high one If Winnie went to the bathroom in the 100 acre woods, what would something be he should NOT take out with him? 

The Poooooo 

Or maybe you would cause like you're in the woods. Where else would it go. No sewage systems..hmm I'll come back to this one. Has to be something to do with poo tho.. 

A Christian man and his children are talking.. Girl: Dad, I have some bad news.

Dad: What?

Girl: I'm a lesbian.

Dad: Okay.

Sister: Dad, I have some bad news too.

Dad: What?

Sister: I'm a lesbian too.

Dad: God, does anyone in this house like boys?

Son: I do.
Did you hear about the Italian chef who died? He pasta way.
Where do men go for vacation after their bar mitzvah? Jew-bouti
How many Call Of Duty players does it take to change a light bulb? Both of them.
Listen to this new joke.... 584753
What do you call it when a song is cut off before it ends? ...a clefhanger.
Why does Paris have trees along Main Street? Because Germans like to walk in the shade.
3 Englishmen are stranded in a forest... and after days without food they come across a dead deer. Unable to decide on who gets to eat what part, the first says: "Well I go for Manchester, so I'll have the chest." The second says "I go for Liverpool, so I'll have the liver." He then turns to the third and says "Enjoy your meal Gunners supporter"
Did you hear about the neutron that was arrested yesterday? He wasn't charged tho
Two sides of hummus decided to go out to eat Two sides of hummus decided to go out to eat.  Once they finished eating, they said, "chickpeas!"
An internet meme caught his wife cheating in their bed. "And I say heeey heeey heeey heeey heeey!!!"
You wanna know how to say "Redonkulous" in Spanish? "Redicburro"
Trump just posted a picture of the protests in Romania.. .. as evidence he had the biggest inauguration crowd ever.
Two refugees are waiting in line to get into the US... Two refugees are waiting in line to get into the US, one says "screw this line, I'm going to shoot Trump". He leaves for a while and then comes back to resume his place in line. The other guy says "so, did you do it?" He says "no, the line there was even longer than this one."
Why was the patient angry at the doctor who wanted his urine sample? He was taking the piss
Guy walks into a Mexican restaurant but he's not that hungry... And they serve free tortilla chips. He asks for one chip and they give it to him. He swipes his credit card, and nothing happens. The employee looks at him and says, "Dude... it's a chip."
What's the difference between my gf and Roald Dahl Roald Dahl has a Magic Finger
Captain hook can't kill 20 kindergarteners. But Sandy Hook can. 
At what time do drug dealers wake up? At the crack of dawn!
My old girlfriend was bad at math That's Y she's my X.
What's a Trump supporter's favorite college? Electoral.
What did the father buffalo say to his son as his son was leaving? "Please be careful on your way to school. There are hunters out there today and I'm worried."  
"It's ok, Dad," his son replied, "I'll be safe."  
The son buffalo had just gotten out of sight before the dad heard the gunshots and wept. If only he'd just made him stay home....
Why does Donald Trump like the NFL better than college football? Because it's Big League
My African-American friend hooked up with a girl from Thailand... It was a real black-Thai affair.
what does a hornet an rain gear have in common? Yellow jacket
Did you guys hear about the Bowling Green Massacre? On 9/3/16 they lost to The Ohio State 77-10
What do you call a surrealist painter that converts to Islam? Muhammad Dali
Who are the fastest readers in the world? The people in the World Trade Center, those mother fuckers blew through 110 stories in 5 seconds.
Why did the chicken go to the library? To check out a book-book-book!
What do you call a stubborn donkey? A badass
What's the easiest class in a Catholic school? Religion.

It has no facts to memorize 
Today I change my major from law to liberal arts. Psych.
My girlfriend doesn't want me to come in her ear My girlfriend said not to cum in my ear because she will go deaf, but I told her that I cum in her mouth all the time and that doesn't get her to shut the fuck up. 
Why don't sharks eat more than one dentist at a time? They're filling.
What's the difference between Extreme Vetting and Waterboarding? (Also seeking alternate punch lines) .... the need for rendition.
Brady once again charged with letting the air out of something. This time it was the Falcons defense
My wife is a teacher hoping for a snow day, and I told her to brace for Winter Storm Christopher. She said "They don't close schools in Michigan for 3 inches of white stuff"
Did you hear about the gangster who loved apples? He was a member of the honeycrips
Talking street A man walks up to a street.

The street says to the man:

"Hey!"

The jumps in surprise as the street shouts at him once more.

The man is puzzled.

"Excuse me?" The man said.

"I'm a talking street! I tell you when a car is coming!"

"That's convenient," The man replied.

The road told the man that there where no cars coming. 

The man crossed the street. 

The man began crossing back to the side in which he came from.

"What are you doing?" Asked the street.

"Double-Crossing you!" The man laughed.

The man promptly got hit by a semi truck.

The Road replied with: "I'm not letting you walk all over me like that!"
[nsfw] Everybody thinks Tom Brady had the best comeback ever But Kim Kardashian is the cumback queen
Found this joke on a sticky note Person1: Hey person2 I need to get into your Reddit account, what's the username and password?

Person2: Ok, the username is "suck my"

Person1: Ok, and the password?

Person2: Dick

Person1: Passwords too short.
Climate change doesn't matter if you stay indoors. 
My friend is upset because her boyfriend won't eat out anymore since they got a meal delivery service. She says she's going to try putting a blue apron sticker on her box and see what happens.
(NSFW) I'm a bit like Beer... I also come in pints.
The more medical students I met, the less I trust doctors. 
How do young bees get to school? Why, the school buzz, of course!
Did you hear about the weird physicist? He's a lovely guy but he's got some strange quarks. 
"What time does the library open?" The man on the phone asks. "Nine AM," came the reply. "And what's the idea of calling me at home in the middle of the night to ask a question like that?"

"Not until nine AM?" The man said in a disappointed voice. 

"No not till nine!" The librarian said. "Why do you want to get in before nine?" 

"Who said I wanted to get in? I want to get out."

What word do you never want to call a Black Man that starts with N and ends with r Neighbor
What's the most common phrase uttered by a blond after sex? "Are you guys all on the same team?"
Why should doctors wear surgical masks when pulling the plug on Donald Trump? So no one can see their smiles.
Why can you make a comparison between the Patriots and Lara Croft? Because they both get TomBrady
I just read a post about Queen Elizabeth II, and something struck me as odd... After spending 65 years on the throne, I suppose she's the most constipated ruler ever.
Just when defeat seemed inevitable... when all hope was lost and my prayers seemed futile... THE PATRIOTS WON !!! Oh, and something about a big game yesterday? I don't watch football.
A kid says to his younger brother: "Look, i found a dildo underneath mom's pillow."
The brother replies: "What's a pillow?"
How do you start a rave in Ethiopia? You nail a piece of toast to the wall
Tired of people complaining about Ukrainian body's of water that Russia is occupying Crimea river.
What did the leader of Russia say when someone knocked on the bathroom door? Leave me alone Im Putin
A man walks into a bar with a suitcase.. ..and orders a drink. Bored, he opens his suitcase and takes out a piano and sets it on the table. Then he reaches back into the suitcase and takes out a tiny man in a tuxedo. The tiny man immediately starts playing the piano. 

The bartender is impressed. He says, " Wow! Thats amazing! Where did you get that?" .

The man explains that he found a Jinni's lamp in the sand and when he rubbed it, a Jinni emerged and promised to fulfill one wish.

Surprised, the bartender asked, " Do you still have the lamp? Can i give it a try?"

"Sure", says the man and reaches out to his suitcase and pulls out a beautiful golden copper lamp.

The bartender takes the lamp and rubs it. Sure enough, a Jinni appears and grants the bartender one wish. 

The bartender says, " Umm.. i wanna be rich..i want a million bucks!" . POOF!! Suddenly the bar is filled with ducks. A MILLION ducks.

"Heyy!!" , exclaims the bartender, " I asked for a million bucks, not ducks!! Is your Jinni hard of hearing or something?!"

To which the man says , " You dont really think i wished for a 12 inch pianist, do you?"
Why do we evacuate women before the men in an emergency? So we can assess the situation properly. 
Someone was handing out certificates for a free Karate Lesson at the mall yesterday He told me I could only Taek Won Do
The Patriots are true gentlemen. They let the Falcons finish their game before they started theirs.
THE BIG CRASH 

It is the middle of the night in the middle of nowhere, two cars both slightly cross over the white line in the centre of the road. They collide and a fair amount of damage is done, miraculously neither driver is hurt.

They both get out. One is a doctor, one is a lawyer. The lawyer calls the police on his cell phone and they say they will be there within 20 minutes.

It’s cold and damp, and both men are shaken up. The lawyer offers the doctor a drink of brandy from his hip flask, the doctor accepts, drinks and hands it back to the lawyer, who then puts it away.

“Aren’t you going to have a drink?” the doctor says.

“AFTER the police get here.” replies the lawyer
A blonde walks into a library and says to the librarian "CAN I GET A BIG MAC FRIES AND A COKE?!!" The librarian says "excuse me miss.....this is a library." The blonde says...."oh im sorry (whispers) can i get a big mac fries and a coke?"
What's the difference between a pizza and an art degree? A pizza doesn't deliver an art degree 
Finally took Revenge from my ex... She had it since last two weeks. Gotta return it back to the library. 
You know there's an actual name for unexpected sex right? The Spanish Inquisition. Because no one sees it coming.
There are a lot of jokes in the world Most of them are people. 
I don't drink anymore. I freeze it now and I eat it like a popsicle. 
I hate to be a bad loser A blonde, a red head and a brunette were competing in the Huron River Breast Stroke Championships. The redhead won and the brunette came in second. However, there was no sign of the final contestant. Hours and hours went by causing grave concern and worry. Just as everyone was losing hope, the blonde finally arrived. The crowd was extremely happy and relieved to see her. They embraced the young girl as she came ashore. After all of the excitement died down, she leaned over to the judge and whispered, "I hate to be a bad loser, but I think those other girls used their arms." 


I couldn't sleep because woman was knocking on my door at 2 AM last night I tried to go back to sleep but eventually I had to let her out.
A man goes to an ENT doctor Because his nose was growing at an excessive rate, it was already 11 and a half inches long. 

Doctor walks in and says, I'm sorry to have to tell you this, but if it keeps it up, by this time next week I won't be able to see you anymore. I'll have to give you a referral to a podiatrist, because by next week, it'll already be a foot!

I am terrified of elevators, I'm gonna start taking steps to avoid them.
I believe as a society, it is our dictionaries that define us.
I had a confusing sex dream last night It was a real mindfuck
What's the difference between the church 1,000 years ago and the church today? A thousand years ago Father Roy didn't get arrested.
Want to know how I got back from the middle east? I Ran
I jokingly told my friend I was gay... He's been fucking me in the ass for 3 months now and hasn't figured out the truth yet. Haha, I can't wait to see the look on his face!
Roger Goodell must be drunk after last night from... all the boos from the Patriots' fans during the post game ceremonies. 
President Trump can never finish a book He always gets stuck in chapter 11
Where does Matthew Mcconaughey's Political Ideology come from? The Altright, Altright, Altright
Why won't Lion win Best Picture? Starving Indian children has always been a naan-issue.
I asked my very religious mother for the new iPhone... And she said she'd get me a smartphone, but I had a choice. If I start going to church, I would get the iPhone I wanted. If I didn't go to church, I would get a crappy low end android. 

She said it was Yahweh or the Huawei. 
and God promised men that good and obedient wives would be found in all corners of world... ...then God made the Earth round..and he laughed and laughed.

edit: I proof read this so may times... amd -> and
U should try the salmon in river styxs Its too die for
Why is Alabama the best place for sandwiches? Because of their experience working with inbreds.
My wife found out that our dog, a Schnauzer, could hardly hear, 
My wife  found out that our dog, a Schnauzer, could hardly hear,
so she took it to the vet.
The vet found that the problem was hair in the dog's ears.
He cleaned both ears and the dog could then hear fine.
The vet then proceeded to tell Andrea that, if she wanted to keep this from
recurring, she should go to the pharmacy
and get some "Nair" hair remover and rub it in the dog's
ears once a month.
Andrea went to the store and bought some "Nair" hair remover.
At the register, the pharmacist told her, "If you're going to use this under
your arms, don't use deodorant for a few days."
Andrea said, "I'm not using it under my arms."
The pharmacist said, "If you're using it on your legs, don't use body lotion
for a couple of days."
Andrea replied, "I'm not using it on my legs either. If you must know,
I'm using it on my Schnauzer."
The pharmacist said, "Well, stay off your bicycle for at least a week."

The problem with Bill Clinton Is that he never learned harass was one word.
What do you call a substance that makes people attracted to both genders? A bi-product!
Australians don't have sex Australians mate
A Cardinal walks into the Pope's office... ... and he says, "Your Eminence, I have some good news and some bad news."

The Pope, of course, is an optimistic fellow, so he says, "I'll have the good news first."

The Cardinal tells him, "It seems that Jesus Christ has returned. He's on the phone and he wants to speak to you."

The Pope, of course, is elated.  He says, "There can be no bad news on a day like this, but go ahead: what's the bad news?"

And the Cardinal tells him, "He's calling from Salt Lake City."
How do you choke a predatory bird? Give them a 28-3 lead in the Super Bowl.
Where is the safest place to be on a capsizing ship? (Worst joke ever) The Galley!

Everything but the kitchen sinks.

^(I warned you)
What did the father buffalo say to his son as he left for school? Bison.
Your breasts looked bigger on your profile... ...which means I won't feel so bad when you pull my pants down now.
A bear walks into a bar in Bedford, TX... He takes a seat at the bar as the bartender reluctantly walks over to him. "How can I help you?" He asks.

"I need a beer, I've had a horrible day..." says the bear, somewhat discouraged.

"Well sir, I'm sorry but we don't serve bears beer in Bedford, TX." replies the bar keep.

"I understand the law, but I'm really having an awful day! I won't bother anyone... come on!" The bear is getting a little frustrated at this point.

"Mr. Bear, I wish I could oblige but the law is the law."

The bear, now starting to get irritated, spots a female at the other end of the bar who is enjoying a cold one herself. "LOOK MAN... I'm not looking for any trouble. Give me a beer or I'm going to go over there and EAT THAT BITCH sitting at the end of the bar!!"

The bartender is a little taken aback, but decides to stick to his guns. "Look here bear, I already told you we don't serve bears beer in Bedford, TX! You ain't gonna sway me into breaking the law!"

Aggravated, the bear walks to the end of the bar and eats the lady. Pleased with his display of dominance, he sits back down and stares at the bartender. "I tried to warn you! Give me that fucking beer before anyone else gets hurt."

"Like I said, we don't serve bears beer in Bedford, TX. Especially if they are high on drugs!"

The bear looks puzzled. "What the hell? I'M NOT HIGH ON DRUGS!"

"The hell you are! That was a BARBITURATE!"

The Farmer's Daughter A farmer drove to a neighbor’s farmhouse and knocked at the door. 
 
A boy, about 9, opened the door.
 
"Is your dad or mom home?" said the farmer.
"No, they went to town."
"How about your brother, Howard? Is he here?" 
"No, he went with Mom and Dad."
 
The farmer stood there for a few minutes, shifting from one foot to the other, mumbling to himself, when the young boy says, "I know where all the tools are, if you want to borrow one, or I can give Dad a message."
 
"Well," said the farmer uncomfortably, "No, I really want to talk to your Dad, about your brother Howard getting my daughter Suzy pregnant!".
 
The boy thought for a moment, then says, "You’ll have to talk to my Dad about that. I know he charges $50 for the bulls and $15 for the pigs, but I have no idea how much he charges for Howard."

Brokeback Mountain was such a nontraditional movie... ... it's the only one I've seen where the good guy gets it in the end.
What kind of food just puts you in a bad mood? Feel-awful
What is Mexico's National Animal? The drug mule.
What file format does Gordon Ramsay take photos in? FUCKING RAW!
I nearly talked my way out of a speeding fine earlier by telling this Police woman she looked bloody stunning Then I went and fucked it up by saying, 'And that's not the drink talking either'
When I went away to college my grandmother gave me a brand new bible. Well I didn't really want a bible. I needed money but I said thank you all the same and went away to college. 

I was having a great time but was burning through money very quickly. I called my grandmother and said "grandma I love it here a college but I'm going to need more cash to stay." She said "have you opened your bible?" Of course I hadn't but I said "of course grandma I pray every night." "Good" she said and hung up the phone.

A couple months later I really was in desperate need of cash. I called my grandma again. "Grandma I have excellent grades and I'm loving college but I will have to drop out if I don't get some money." She said "Are you sure you are READING your bible?" Again I lied and said "of course grandma." "Good" she said and hung up. 

I finally ran out of money and had to drop out. I called my grandma and said "Hey! I have to drop out now because you did not send me any money!" She said "you really should read your bible" and hung up the phone. I finally opened the bible and sure enough right on the inside... in my grandmother's handwriting... it said " Fuck you"
A man walks in and notices something different about his wife.... He walks into the house and is pretty sure this time something might be different with his Wife.

"The hair!" he thinks...   Hmm.. No....

"The dress!" he continues

Nup....

"The shoes!" he hazards.

No.. No... not sure...

Then he realises.... 

He's walked into the wrong house.
Falcons CHOKE!!!
What is the recipe for success for ice cream men? Good Humor.
What's the correct way to pronounce nihilism? Doesn't matter.
You should always have a pet to make you feel safe... Just the other night my wife woke me tell me heard glass breaking and footsteps downstairs.

She calmed down when I told it was probably just the fish.
Look at all those hot children in that schoolyard! It's 115°F out you sick fucks
Whats the difference between my ex gf and my childhood imagination? Nothing, they both don't exist anymore.
If life gives you lemons, you make lemonade, But if fife gives you melons...

You probably have dyslexia
Single ones from Reddit: If you have to choose between your dream date and one last concert of Queen? How many hours you will arrive early?
What did the French call the Germans during WW1? Somme of bitches.
I went to Basic Training with some guy who was issued two left footed boots.  He didn't say anything, and just wore two left boots on his feet. He ended up being medically discharged for foot problems before he graduated.

  But the guy who was issued two right footed boots on his feet managed to graduate. He was all right.

Q:Name of Melanias new book A:Mein Trump
Ahmad, a Muslim American man, was at the United States border... Ahmad, a Muslim American man, was at the United States border, returning to the USA after a holiday in Canada.

He rolled down the window to his car and pulled up to the Border Guard who was waving him forward.

"What is the purpose of your visit?" asked the border guard.

'I'm an American. I'm returning home," replied Ahmad.

"Are you aware of President Trump's executive orders regarding Muslims?" asked the border guard.

"Yes. But I'm not from one of the seven nations in the order. Also I am an American citizen," replied Ahmad.

"What are your thoughts on the order?" asked the border guard.

"The United States has the right to protect itself."

"And what are your thoughts on President Trump?" asked the board guard.

"Well... certainly I feel the same way about him that you do," replied Ahmad.

"If that were true, I'd have to arrest you," replied the border guard.
I heard Kevin O'Leary was running in a leadership race I'm just not sure if it's in Canada or the US
They say good things come in threes... Try telling that to someone with 
Down Syndrome 
How do you get a champagne cork back in the bottle? I don't know, ask a Falcons fan
What do you call an Invisible Zeppelin? A Hiddenburg.
my wife has sick tits she has breast cancer 
[NSFW] Women have a new form a birth control She'll fuck a guy real hard and then about half-way through lay on her back and then take it up the ass. It's called *The Falcon Method*.
How many Alzheimer's patients does it take to change a lightbulb? To get to the other side
TIL in 1892 a man was investigated for never having taken a bowel movement in his life. They called him "No shit Sherlock"
What do you do behind your wife's back? Doggystyle 
So a man in a wheelchair is having dinner at a restaurant. The waiter comes over and asks: "Would you like a glass of wine"? To this the man replies: "No thanks, I'm driving".
First Harrison Ford got cast as Han Solo... then he got cast as Han Solo.
All these Trump jokes... that he'll never understand.
Did you hear about the sex move called the Tom Brady? I'm not sure of the specific mechanics but, you cum from behind FTW!
A new study has revealed that diarrhea is actually based on heredity They found if runs in your jeans
I'm tired of people talking about how strong ants are. I can pick up a leaf too, who cares.
When I was young, I used to have an obsession with Posh Spice Which cost my mum a fortune in saffron
One morning eating my breakfast... Just cereal, i was looking at the missing person part on the milk carton, and i had seen many of these before but some reason this one caught my eye, it read "Lilly, missing 2 weeks blonde hair, blue eyes, always happy". A few days later im sat in my office on the 50th floor and i look out of my window and i see a blue tarp held by duct tape but had fallen down slightly, and inside was a little girl on a matress with her hands tied. I instantly remembered the girl on the milk carton, blonde hair, yes, blue eyes, oh my god yeah, always happy, well she was crying her fucking eyes out, no way that its her.
Did you hear about the charges being pressed on the mineral? It was assault.
They say history repeats itself... But I never expected it to repeat itself so soon, let alone at the superbowl! I haven't seen a lead blown so bad since Hillary's 2016 Campaign!
In honor of the Bowling Green Massacre, wear a green ribbon . . . . . . or, perhaps more appropriately, some color you made up in your head.
What are the most productive pants? Participants.
I went to an institute of botanical research the other day, but they only had one type of mushroom It was a shiitake 
Eating clocks is not that difficult. It's just very time-consuming.
How Do You Cut Down A Tree? A sawwwwwwww Dude
Why don't you ever see hippos hiding in trees? Because they're really good at it.
Everyone were dying, except joseph He kept stalin his death
How do you explain destiny to a child of divorced parents? Tell them their custody is in their hands.
Tom Brady now has a perfect track record. He's won 5/7 Superbowls he's been in.
What American State sells small pop cans? Mini-Soda (Minnesota)
Why did the penguin break up with the walrus? Because they were polar opposites.
Why did the people living next door to the tennis factory call the cops? Because they were making a racquet.
I will sing of the blessings of the Lord. During the Testimony period in a church service, The 16 year old Pastor's daughter stood up and said:
"Praise the Lord!"
Everybody shouted with joy, "Hallelujah!" 
She continued:"Since the age of 13, I've been experiencing serious pain and bleeding every month and it was unbearable. At times it would last 3-5 days. But now, after a series of Bible studies with Brother Solomon in his house, the monthly pain and blood flow have stopped for more than 3 months now. No more pain, no more bleeding. You can even see I'm getting fatter and prettier. 
And I'm believing God to perfect my healing as we have started to pray seriously about the small problem of vomiting, especially in the morning. Praise the Lord!". 
Why Poop is named Poop Because when you say it your mouth makes the same motion your butthole does when you poop!
Stolen car A drunk walks out of a bar with a key in his hand and he is stumbling
Back and forth. A cop on the beat sees him and approaches,
"Can I help you Sir?"

"Yessh! Ssssomebody ssstole my carrr", the man replies.

The cop asks, "Where was your car the last time you saw it?"

"It wasss on the end of thisshh key", the man replies.

About that time the cop looks down and sees the man's wiener hanging out of his fly for all the world to see.

He asks the man, "Sir, are you aware that you are exposing yourself?"

Momentarily confused, the drunk looks down at his crotch and without missing a beat, blurts out....

"Holy shit! My girlfriend's gone, too!!"
Golf balls A man got on the bus with both of his front trouser pockets full of golf balls and sat down next to a beautiful blonde.

The puzzled blonde kept looking at him and his bulging pockets.

Finally, after many glances from her, he said, "It's golf balls."

The blonde continued to look at him for a very long time, thinking deeply about what he had said.

Finally, unable to contain her curiosity any longer, she asked,

"Does it hurt as much as tennis elbow..?"  :)😨😨😨😨😨😨
I just watched an Imam trying to perform a tracheotomy on a Labrador while free-falling at 10,000 feet... ... I'm not sure extreme vetting for Muslims is such a good idea.
A black guy in a library asked me where the colored printer was I replied, "Dude, it's 2017, you can use any printer you want."
Your Uncle Jack got stuck on a roof Would you help your Uncle Jack off?
It's no wonder falcons are an endangered species They've got an extreme choking problem.
Radio Station Contest A local radio station was running a competition - words that weren't in the dictionary yet could still be used in sentence that would make logical sense. The prize was a trip to Bali.

DJ: "96FM here, what's your name?"

Caller: "Hi, me name's Dave."

DJ: "Dave, what's your word?"

Caller: "Goan... spelt, G-O-A-N, pronounced 'go-an'."

DJ: "... You are correct, Dave, 'goan' is not in the dictionary. Now, for a trip to Bali: What sentence can you use that word in that would make sense?"

Caller: "Goan f$&k yourself!"

The DJ cut the caller short and took other calls, all unsuccessful until:

DJ: "96FM, what's your name?"

Caller: "Hi, me name's Francis."

DJ: "Francis, what's your word?"

Caller: "Smee... spelt S-M-E-E, pronounced 'smee'."

DJ: "... You are correct, Francis, 'smee' is not in the dictionary. Now, for a trip to Bali: What sentence can you use that word in that would make sense?"

Caller: "Smee again! Goan f**k yourself!"
Dinosaur Why can't dinosaurs clap their hands?

because they're dead!
What did Nancy Sinatra say about her actor friend Christopher's custom-made footwear? These boots are made for Walken.
Jack - Bro do you know newton's second law? Jhonny - I am a Science student bro! not a Law student.
For the Love of Tractors So there's this guy who reaaaally loves tractors. He had tractor toys, he read tractor weekly, he has tractor posters on his wall.... the works. He spent all his time consumed with tractors. So naturally, his mother got worried. She convinced him to go to the local bar to try and meet someone. 

So he reluctantly goes to the bar and, miraculously, he finds a woman who loves tractors too. (Not as much as him, though because NO-ONE loves tractors as much as this guy). But he meets this girl who loves tractors enough to stimulate him, intellectually. 

So fast forward a couple of months and this guy brings his girlfriend to the local field to watch the tractors go by during the sunset. He proposes to her and she says yes. Then they both fall asleep in the field and he has a dream that a tractor was coming to run over him. He wakes and there is a tractor coming towards him! He quickly rolls away but his fiancée gets run over and killed.

He is obviously devastated and swears never to even look at a tractor ever again. So he tears down all his posters and spends all his time in his room, alone and depressed for a few weeks until his mother, again intervenes and gets him to go to the local pub again.

When he arrives, the pub is on fire! He rushes in and takes a deep breath, sucking in all the fire and smoke.

The firemen immediately ask him how he did it. 

"I'm an ex-tractor fan."
I bought a copy of the Kama Sutra to spice things up in the bedroom with my girlfriend... ...unfortunately, it wouldn't fit inside her.
What did the penguin say when he walked into the bar ouch
What do you call an invisible black man? Incog-negro
A Scottish, fedora-wearing art professor complimented his Scandinavian student. "Nice skies, Finnish lass!"
Where do people who praise WiFi go? The promised LAN.
And God said unto John, "Come forth, and you shall receive eternal life." But John came fifth and won a toaster.
How to tell an estate agent is lying? Their lips will be moving.
It's so unfair that people are still judged by the color of their skin. If you want a tattoo, you should be able to get a tattoo and not worry about what people think.
What do you call Santa without both his arms?... ***Can't Applause...***
Whats green and smells of pork? Kermit's fingers
Did you hear that Donald Trump converted to Judaism? He heard that Vladimir Putin likes to drink vodka with orange jews.
I hear the capital of Sweden really sucks.... But no one can leave.
Yo mamma so stupid She tells her kids yo mamma jokes
Queen Elizabeth has been on the Throne for 65 years That's one hell of a dodgy curry.
Did you hear about the veterinarian who caught laryngitis? He is mostly just a hoarse doctor now.
My girlfriend told me to take a spider out instead of kill it. We went and had drinks. Cool guy, wants to be a web designer. 
What is a plane carrying yesterday's Superbowl officials called? Jet LI. 
The Falcons Rise Up every year..... lose every year.
The Patriots are like a giant dick. Everyone that tries to take them on, ends up choking.
Reddit, I know the cure to cancer [removed]
Why did the Atlanta Falcons throw their 28-3 lead in the Super Bowl? They realized that if they won they'd have to visit President Trump in the Whitehouse.
The Ultimate Computer The Ultimate Computer stood at the end of the Ultimate Computer Company's production line. One day, a guided school tour arrived.
The salesman stepped forward to give his prepared demo. "This," he said, "is the Ultimate Computer. It will give an intelligent answer to any question you may care to ask it. Would anyone like to try?"
Little Johnny quickly stepped forward and asked, "Where is my father?"
There was the soft hum of powerful electronic gear going to the task. Panel lights lit and blinked, and within a couple of seconds the answer appeared on the screen: "Fishing in Florida."
Little Johnny laughed, "Actually, my father is dead! It was a trick question."
The salesman, quickly thinking on his feet, replied that he was sorry the answer was unsatisfactory, but as the Ultimate Computer was precise, perhaps a rewording of the question might work better.
Little Johnny thought and said to the Ultimate Computer, "Where is my mother's husband?" Again, the hum of the powerful electronic brain filled the room.
After a moment, the screen lit up with an answer: "Dead. But your father is still fishing in Florida."
Which vegetable is kind of rad? Radish
Today in class we were sayin synonoms.. And my friend said "Donald Trump and Idiot!". My teacher wrote it down
How much room is needed for fungi to grow? As mushroom as possible.
Did you hear Atlanta is getting a new mascot? Hillary Clinton
My girlfriend broke up with me because I stole her wheelchair... Deep down I knew she'd come crawling back to me.
Hey! What's up? A heartwarming animated film about a boy, an old man, and his dog who all fly away to an exotic place in a balloon house.
I just got over 15 Valentines cards! It left me breathless... The security guard at the Hallmark store gave quite a chase.
To be Frank... I'd have to change my name 
I submitted my DNA for genetic testing and the lab wrote back that I'm related to Donald Trump! I guess that's what I get for using 24 and me . . .
Why is Donald Trump orange? Because he is ripe.
We used to live on a very busy main road. 
But after our 4th child got run over, we decided to move in to a house.

If pros and cons were opposites.... Then wouldn't Congress be the opposite of progress?
Why did Obama get two terms as President? Because every black man gets a longer sentence.
What's the difference between a ginger and a vegetable? One's brain dead and the other is good for you

I have 3 heads, 4 legs, 6 hands and 416 fingers, what am I? A liar.
This was the most Superbowlly Super Bowl ever *Super Bowl LI
What do hobbit homes with no entrances need? More doors.
"I prefer guys who make small dick jokes about themselves over those who make big dick jokes about themselves." "Well, I have a medium dick. It can talk to ghosts."
I like my bowels like I like my women... Loose.
In breaking news, Trump's personal library has burned down The fire consumed both books and in a tragic twist he hadn't even finished coloring the second one
Who is your favorite rapper? Mine is  Bill Cosby, WAIT no I meant favorite RAPER not rapper, my bad
Someone told me that I'm a narcissist today I told them its everyone else that has a problem 
A chemist auditioned for the play He got a 82 role!
Looking at you is like looking at Chernobyl "Why, because I'm radiantly beautiful?"

"No because you're a fucking disaster."


I bet all the Falcon's fans out there are feeling a bit... deflated.

^[hangs ^head ^in ^shame]
A mad scientist is showing off his newest invetion to his henchman "Behold! This wrist-mounted device shows me my exact location and speed within the fourth dimension!"

"Looks kinda like a wristwatch to me Boss."
"Want to hear an unfunny joke?" "No" Too late.
Goku has a big chance to... Go coo at a bird.
What do you call a large dog that meditates? Aware wolf.



I had Patriots Sex this morning. That's where you cum from behind.
How did the little Scottish dog feel when he saw a monster? Terrier-fied!


You hear about that failed drug dealer? He couldn't cut it.
I was in a restaurant when... A man asked 'Who knows CPR?'

And I said, 'I know all the letters of the alphabet!'

And we all laughed, 

And laughed, 

And laughed, 

Except one guy
Why did Jeffrey Dahmer move to a larger apartment? He needed more leg room.
What isn't a better love story than Twilight? Donald and Ivanka. 
What do you call a gay drive by? A fruit-rollup

We got 6 inches of snow last night and I'm the only one to show up to work today You'd think these pussies would like 6 inches
My wife is leaving me because of my mental illness. At least thats what the cat told me.
What did you call a Mexican snake? Hisssspanic
My dad doesnt trust anyone, in fact he has a saying about it But he wouldnt tell me



Credits: Anthony Jeselnik 
Two sewing machines were walking down the road... As they pass by each other one says to the other "Hey are you that Singer?".

The other replies "Janome?".
What medical condition are elderly bats most afraid of? Incontinence.
What do you call a dancing Latina with a yeast infection? Macarena and cheese
What is the difference between a couch and a black person? Couch can support a family of five.
How do you make a pigeon explode? Convert it to islam
Apparently breastfeeding hurts Which is sucky. 
The NFL decides to put on a barnyard show Eli Manning says, "*New York City has the best breakfast egg sandwiches so I'll play the chicken.*"

Aaron Rodgers says, "*Wisconsin has the best cheese so I'll play the cow.*"

Tom Brady says, "*We just won five Super Bowls so I'll be the GOAT.*"

8th anniversary Our 8th anniversary was approaching and my wife pointed out that it was the bronze anniversary. She suggested that we both get something for each other that fit this theme, but not something dumb. She said she'd like me to put a lot of thought into it. I replied, "So you want the brains and the bronze?"
Austin Powers: Jimi Hendrix deceased, drugs. Austin Powers: Jimi Hendrix deceased, drugs. Janis Joplin deceased, alcohol. Mama Cass deceased, ham sandwich.  Atlanta Falcons, deceased, choked on a 25 point lead.
" I pulled you over today because do you know how fast you were going today, sir?" "I definitely was not driving as fast as you, officer."
An old grumpy lady gets in a bus. She hijacks the speaker and yells :


"All of you that sit on the left side of this bus are assholes ! The ones sitting on the right are sons of bitches !!!"


A man rise and answers :


"Mrs. This is absolutely unacceptable, i'm not an asshole !"


"**THEN GET ON THE OTHER SIDE YOU SON OF A BITCH !**"


A husband and wife in their sixties were coming up on their 40th wedding anniversary. Knowing his wIfe loved antiques, he bought a beautiful old brass oil lamp for her.

When she unwrapped it, a genie appeared. 

He thanked them and gave each of them one wish. 

The wife wished for an all expenses paid, first class, around the world cruise with her husband.

Shazam!

Instantly she was presented with tickets for the entire journey, plus expensive side trips, dinners, shopping, etc.

The husband, however, wished he had a female companion who was 30 years younger.

Shazam!

Instantly he turned 93 years old.
I went to the Atlanta Falcons locker room to get some change for a dollar... But they only gave me 3 quarters.
Two Scientists Walk Into a Bar The first scientist says "I'll have some H2O"

The second scientist then proceeds to grab a stool from the bar and throw it at his colleague, realising that the first scientist was trying to murder him.


If only Jason Pierre Paul played for the Patriots instead of the Giants... He would be the first NFL player to have a ring on every finger.
What is Mexico's National Animal? The drug mule.
Where did the king keep his armies? In his sleevies
What's the difference between a dirty bird and a dirty tub? A DIRTY TUB HAS A RING! 
Two old prostitutes are sitting on a porch reminiscing about the good old days... One asks: "Have you ever been picked up by the fuzz?" 
The other one replies: "No, but I've been swung by the tits a few times."
Someone running behind a car gets exhausted Someone running in front of a car gets tired
How do you wake Lady Gaga from a Nap? Poker Face
My son didn't take his kleptomania medication this morning. He took mine. 
God said to Adam "I'm going to make you a woman" God: "She's going to clean for you, cook anything you want whenever you want it, always look beautiful, never be bad tempered, give you children, always obedient, and she'll never argue with you."  
Adam: "That sounds great, but what'll it cost me?"  
God: "Oh, an arm and a leg."  
Adam: "That's a bit steep. What can I get for a rib?"
The Atlanta quarterback should become a baseball pitcher... He's great at throwing.
Tommy's grandfather Miss Caroline's 6th grade world history class is taking a unit on WWII. The teacher said that if anyone had veterans from the war in their family, ask them to come to class and speak about their experiences. Some students felt they needed this to be a bit more with their time, so the teacher offered bonus points for whoever wished to get someone to speak.
Tommy ran home that day and phoned his grandfather. He asked him if he would like to come and speak about WWII I'm front of his class. His grandfather agreed and Tommy happily went out the rest of his day. The next class, Tommy's grandfather was in the front of the classroom preparing to speak.

Teacher : Alright class, please welcome Mr.                         Schwartz, who will be speaking about his experiences during WWII.

Grandfather : Thank you miss. Now how many of you would like to hear an action story?

Almost all of the students shot up their hands.

Grandfather : Alrighty then. It was a gloomy day, I was in my airplane with top secret information. I looked around to see almost clear skies. Then I spotted them. Three Fokkers. One behind and on either side.

The class began to giggle and Miss Caroline blushed

Grandfather : Now I kept my cool and did a loop de loop to get behind em. That's when I fired. Bang Bang Bang! The direct hits. One of the Fokkers down, two more to go.

At this the class burst into laughter

Teacher : Now class, Fokker is an airplane manufacturer isn't that right Mr. Schwartz?

Grandfather : Huh? Oh yes that is correct. However, these particular Fokkers were flying Messerschmitts.
Want to hear a Super Bowl joke? The Atlanta Falcons.
I bought some shoes from a drug dealer I'm Ng sure what he laced them with but I've been tripping all day
Free hoover It's just collecting dust 
Why is free Wi-Fi never seen in churches? Because no church wants to be challenged by an invisible power that actually works.
How could anybody be a masochist? Beats me...
An English man, Irish man and Scottish man... Are on a plane and the pilot comes out and issues everyone a challange, "if you can guess where we are by sticking your hand out of the window ill give you 50 grand" the Scottish man quickly jumps up and sticks his hand out of the window "we are in Dundee" he guessed, the pilot shakes his head. Then the Irish man trys "we are in Dublin" he guesses, again the pilot shakes his head, then the English man steps up, "we are in Liverpool" he says, shocked the pilot answers "Yes! Thats right, but how did you know?" The English man replies "because my watch has been stolen"
I'm changing my name to Lead So I have a pretty good chance of someone blowing me
Marriage certificate. WIFE: "Honey, what are you doing?"

HUSBAND: "I'm reading our marriage certificate"

WIFE: "What for?"

HUSBAND: "I'm looking for the expiry date..."
Girl wanted me to maker her scream with two fingers. So I poked her in both eyes.
Marriage counselor. A married couple come to the marriage counselor. 

The wife complains: "We were having a perfect marriage, until his girlfriend started dating my boyfriend..."
The Ace Pilot An ace pilot was up in his plane during his down time doing all sorts of tricks.


He gets a furious call from his squadron leader on the ground saying "Get that plane back in the hangar NOW!"


So, the pilot flies down to the hangar but he doesn't land. He flies in one side of the hangar, comes out the other, turns around and does it again.


The squadron leader calls again and says "I told you to get that plane back in the hangar!"


The pilot replies "I had it in there twice! Why didn't someone shut the door while I was in there?"
Wanna hear the best Irish joke ever? Dry weather.
His future is not that bright One evening a man comes to a witch so she can predict his future. The witch starts: "Oh dark forces, let me look into the future of this poor man."  Then she continues " Oh I can see  big Villa with a beautiful garden, naked women, big pool, and I can also see you, my dear." The man, really happy to hear all this, asks. "This is amazing, what am I doing there?" The Witch replies " I can see you gazing at all these through a hole in a fence".
Booze man Little Johny comes to his drunk uncle:
-Uncle, you should stop drinking

-Ahh Johny, I am too old to stop now.

-But, Uncle, it is never too late to stop.

-Then I have plenty of time before I stop, my dear Johny.

What do you call a cow with Parkinsons? Beef Jerky
Donald trump takes The New England Patriots out on his Yacht to celebrate their latest Super Bowl victory. The Yacht sinks and America is great again.
Anne has a will... Anne Hathaway
How do you crucify a spastic? On a swastika.
i've got a Liszt of great composer puns that's Haydn in my closet somewhere... i could look Bach there and read it to you, but i don't think you could Handel it.
What's the difference between dubstep and any other kind of electronic music? In the middle of a dubstep track, Optimus Prime takes a dump.
What did the Cardinal say when he saw the Pope had forgot to flush? Holy shit!
Peety the Dog A man's best friend, Peety the dog, is old and isn't feeling well so he takes him to the vet.  The vet looks the dog over and tells the man that there's nothing much they can do for Peety.  The man explains how long he and Peety have been together and how much the dog means to him and asks the vet if there's anything else he can do for the dog.  So the vet brings in a cat, who walks around and checks Peety out and finally looks up the vet and just shakes his head, and Peety passes away.  A month later the man gets his bill from the vet for $350 and he asks the vet, how come the bill is so much. Whenever you've treated Peety before, the bill was only $50.  Why was it so much this time.  The vet explains that his bill was only $50; the cat scan cost $300.
Two cholo bitches are arguing over who's nails are better, and shit is ABOUT TO GO DOWN. To prevent a fight, what kind of test can you administer in this situation to determine who's nails are actually the most fire? A "lit mas" test.
A woman with no arms or legs.. Is crying on a bench at the beach, i approach her "hey honey, whats the matter?" i say, she looks at me tears streaming down her face "ive never had a man hug me" she says, so i sit next to her and giver a her a nice hug she again looks at me still very upset "i have never been kissed by a man" she says. So i lean in and give her a kiss on the lips, looking a little better than before she finally says "i have never been fucked" so i pick her up and wang her in the sea "now youre fucked"
Three explorers, hunting truffles in the Amazon, get captured by a tribe of cannibals. The tribe members carry the three men, bound with vines, to the village chief. The village chief speaks, and one of the tribesmen translates:

*We are the Omweso tribe. We are a tribe of cannibals, and it is our custom to skin you and eat you alive. We use your skins to make our canoes. But we are a modern tribe, so we will grant you one final request.*

The first explorer thinks: *I don't wanna be skinned alive!* and asks if he can have the pistol from their bags to shoot himself with. 

The chief nods. 

The tribesman rummages through the bag and pulls out the gun and the box of bullets. He takes one bullet out of the box and dumps the rest of the bullets into the river. The first explorer nods farewell to his friends, and blows his brains out. 

The rest of the tribe carries his body away to begin skimming it and the chief turns to the second explorer. 

The second explorer thinks: *I don't wanna be skinned alive! ...but there was only one gun... I've got it!* and asks for the bottle of poison from the poison tipped arrows the tribesman carry. 

The chief nods. 

The tribesman fetches a bottle and the second explorer drinks the whole thing and dies. The tribe members again carry his body off to skin. 

The chief turns to the third explorer who looks him cooly in the eyes. Before the chief says anything the third explorer says: "I want the mess kit out of our bag."

The chief eyes him suspiciously, but nods. 

The tribesman fetches the mess kit and gives it to the third explorer who opens it up immediately. He takes out the spoon and throws it onto the ground. He takes out the knife, looks at it, and throws it on the ground. Finally, he's left with the fork. 

The third explorer looks at the chief, looks at the tribesman, looks at the tribe. Then, he begins stabbing his chest furiously and yells:

***YOU'RE NOT GONNA MAKE A CONOE OUTTA ME!!!***
Since the term "Gay" refers to people who are homosexual I guess that makes them a HOMOsapien
Why don't cannibals eat clowns? Because they taste funny.
Boyfriend: "I bet you $100 you can't say something that makes me both happy and sad". Girlfriend: "of all your friends, you have the biggest dick".
I've been talking to a 13 year old girl for about 2 weeks now We've been texting a lot lately and she just told me she's an undercover cop, that's quite impressive for her age.
Welcome to Trump's America where the best black superbowl player is White.
The author of the book "Childish Retorts" died today. RIP Ewan Whosarmy
Difference between twins I've fucked a set of twins. People have asked me how hard it was to tell them apart, but it was actually quite easy. You see, Caroline was a redhead with an amazing pair of tits, And frank had a cock.
How do you make lady Gaga cry? Poker face
A Russian walks into a bar one, night holding a gun... ... he goes to the bartender and starts shouting.
I KNOW HE'S HERE. HE HAS TO BE. WHO'S THE GODFORSAKEN BASTARD THAT STOLE MY MONKEY?

The bartender, stunned, tried calming him down. But to no avail, the man cocked his gun and shot him point-blank in the forehead. People started screaming.

NOBODY'S LEAVING UNTIL I FIND THE BASTARD THAT STOLE MY MONKEY. He shot a few rounds into the ceiling and headed towards a table where a few drowsy men were finishing their drinks. He shoots one of them and bellows like an animal.

WHO STOLE MY MONKEY? TELL ME NOW OR MINE'LL BE THE LAST FACE YOU'LL EVER SEE IN THIS LIFE. After a few stutters from the gobsmacked guys at the table, he shot rounds into each one's chest and spread them around the table.

WHO STOLE MY MONKEY!

As if to avoid falling over himself, he jolted towards the gypsy band that froze in a dark corner of the bar after the first shot was fired. He stared with cold eyes into the face of the lead singer and asked him the same obsessive question.

DO YOU KNOW WHO STOLE MY MONKEY?

The lead gypsy looks at the Russian, then at his band, then at the Russian again and replies YES BOSS, OF COURSE!

The gypsy band starts playing and the lead starts voicing a high tempo tune:
OH TELL ME LORD WHO STOLE MY MONKEEEEEY...


I accidentally sent a dick pic to everyone in my address book. Not only was it embarrassing, but it also cost me a fortune in stamps. 
How do you circumcise a Trump supporter? Kick his secret gay lover in the jaw. 
Are you sure you're the Falcons? And not the *Falcants?*
I was addicted to the hokey pokey... But I turned myself around.
Beer is like the sun Beer is like the Sun.
It rises in the yeast, and sets in the waist.
Why is spongebob great at high pressure situations? Because he can soak up the pressure.
I'd like to be six again A man was sitting on the edge of the bed, observing
his wife, looking at herself in the mirror. Since her
birthday was not far
off he asked what she'd like to have for her Birthday. 

'I'd like to be six again', she replied, still
looking in the mirror .

On the morning of her Birthday, he arose early, made
her a nice big bowl
of Lucky Charms, and then took her to Six Flags theme
park. What a day!

He put her on every ride in the park; the Death Slide,
the Wall of Fear, the Screaming Monster Roller
Coaster, everything there was.

Five hours later they staggered out of the theme park.
Her head was reeling and her stomach felt upside down.

He then took her to a McDonald's where he ordered her
a Happy Meal with extra fries and a chocolate shake.

Then it was off to a movie, popcorn, a soda pop, and
her favorite candy, M&M's. What a fabulous adventure!

Finally she wobbled home with her husband and collapsed
into bed exhausted.
He leaned over his wife with a big smile and lovingly asked, 'Well Dear,
what was it like being six again?

Her eyes slowly opened and her expression suddenly
changed. 'I meant my dress size, you retard!!!!'

The moral of the story: Even when a man is listening,
he is gonna get it wrong.

Wise Italian Grandfather An old Italian man in Brooklyn is dying. He calls his grandson to his bedside, "Guido, I wan' you lissina me. I wan' you to take-a my chrome plated .38 revolver so you will always remember me."

"But grandpa, I really don't like guns. How about you leave me your Rolex watch instead?"

"You lissina me, boy! Somma day you gonna be runna da business, you gonna have a beautiful wife, lotsa money, a big-a home and maybe a couple of bambinos. "

"Somma day you gonna come-a home and maybe finda you wife inna bed with another man. Whatta you gonna do then? Pointa to you watch and say, ‘Time's up!' "?
What Is Undeniably The Most Hated Thing In The Community Garden? A Dick Tator
A teacher asked her 6th Grade class how many of them were Trump fans... A teacher asked her 6th grade class how many of them were Trump fans.


Not really knowing what a Trump fan is, but wanting to be liked by their teacher, all the kids raised their hands except for Little Johnny. 


The teacher asked Little Johnny why he has decided to be different... again.
Little Johnny said, "Because I'm not a Trump fan." 


The teacher asked, "Why aren't you a fan of Trump?"


Johnny said, "Because I'm a Democrat."


The teacher asked him why he's a Democrat.


Little Johnny answered, "Well, my Mom's a Democrat and my Dad's a Democrat, so I'm a Democrat." 


Annoyed by this answer, the teacher asked, "If your mom was a moron and your dad was an idiot, what would that make you?"


With a big smile, Little Johnny replied, "That would make me a Trump fan."
School is like my baby boy... It hasn't worked right since I dropped it.
The "American Dream" was discussed in class the other day... ... the professor turned to the German foreign exchange student and asked if they had anything like that in Germany to which he responded, 

"We did, but nobody liked it."
What's the point of Jewish football? Getting the quarter back.
Overtime is a curse word in retail.* *And the Atlanta Falcons.
The last time the Reds had a collapse this big West and East Berlin became united
I forgot how to throw a boomerang but then it came back to me. 
The patriots may have won the super bowl... But the Falcons won the popular vote
Falcons return to Atlanta tomorrow Guess the walking dead will be back sooner than we thought
What did Andrew Johnson say when he was inaugurated into office after Walt Whitman wrote his poem? I'm the Captain Now
What kind of party did the Donners have? A meat and greet. 
What's the difference between a rat and a prostitute? One's a cunning runt, the other is a running cunt. 
I have a cold Its snot good. 
A girl is fucking her boyfriend. At her parents house. Her father after being woken by the noises goes upstairs to check it out, and walks in on them.
"Dad!" she exclaimed in a panic "...I'm sorry"
The dad being a dad replies "hi sorry, I'm Dad!"
He then turns to the boyfriend and asks "Are you fucking sorry?"
I tried to send her nudes... ...But the file size was too big.
Who's a urologist's favorite jazz singer? Urethra Franklin!
Peter Dinklage should open a BBQ restaurant Called "Pig Me"
A man and his wife have a kid... A man and his wife have a kid and he is the smartest kid you have ever met. By the age of 3 he was reading full newspaper articles and chapter books most kids don't read until middle school and his dad was the proudest dad in the world and wanted to make sure his son knew it.

He went up to his son and said, "Son, I could never be more proud of you. I am going to go out and get you a present and it can be anything you want."

The son sat there for a second thinking and said, "Dad, I really want a pink ping pong ball." The dad was rather confused by this but decided to go get his son the ball anyways.

As he was in line to check out with the ball he thought to himself, "Nah he doesn't actually want a stupid ping pong ball" so he went and got him an R/C car instead. The son was the happiest kid in the world and was so excited to get his new toy and gave his dad the biggest hug he could and the dad sat there smiling.

A couple years later when the son took standardized tests in elementary school he got a perfect score on every exam and his dad was the proudest dad in the world and wanted to make sure his son knew it.

He went up to his son and said, "Son, I could never be more proud of you. I am going to go out and get you a present and it can be anything you want."

The son sat there for a second thinking and said, "Dad, I really want a pink ping pong ball." The dad was still confused about his sons request but agreed and left to get the son his ball.

As he was about to check out with the ping pong ball he thought to himself, "Nah my son doesn't really want this" and went back and got him a brand new Xbox.

When he got home and gave the present to his son the son was ecstatic and jumped up and down and gave his dad the biggest hug he could and the dad sat there with a smile on his face.

Fast forward a couple years and the son is now graduating high school. Top of his class, full ride to whatever school he wanted (Yale for anyone who cares about that detail), graduated with just about every honor you could think of and his dad was the proudest dad in the world and wanted to make sure his son knew it.

He went up to his son and said, "Son, I could never be more proud of you. I am going to go out and get you a present and it can be anything you want."

The son sat there for a second thinking and said, "Dad, I really want a pink ping pong ball." The dad was yet again confused by his son's odd request but agreed to get the ball.

On his way to the store the dad passed by a motorcycle dealership and thought to himself, "Nah my son really doesn't that stupid ping pong ball when he can have a brand new motorcycle." And so the dad bought the new bike for his son and the son was the happiest son in the world and gave his dad the biggest hug he could before hopping on the bike. The dad sat there with a smile on his face as he watched his son drive off.

A couple weeks later, the mom and dad are sitting at the table eating lunch when they receive a troubling phone call. As they heard the call both of their faces started to turn pale, the son was in a terrible crash and was not expected to live through the rest of the day. The two rushed down to the hospital as soon as they could and they hurried to their son's room. When they got there they were happy to see the son was still conscious. The parents rushed to either side of the bed and the dad took his son's hand and looked him in the face and said, "Son, you have been the best child that anyone could ever ask for and I could never be more proud of you."

The son smiled and said, "Thanks dad."

"I do have one question for you though."

The son looked up at his old man and said, "Anything for you Dad."

"Why did you always want that pink ping pong ball?"

The son smiled and said, "Well I always wanted it bec-"

Then he died.

I haven't seen a lead blown this badly since Hilary's 2016 campaign. 
What does Hillary and the falcons have in common? They both blew it in the last quarter.
Why was the ground all white after Custer's Last Stand? Because the Indians kept coming and coming and coming...
**Courtesy of Stephen King's "The Stand" 
What do the Falcons have in common with Democrats? They both won the popular vote but lost to Trump.
A man walks into a bar ...and says "ouch"

Someone should move that.
A man drives over his wife who's fault is it? The mans, he shouldn't have been driving in the kitchen.
I need to pass my exams So I decided to join the Falcons. They pass even when they shouldn't.
I know why Matt Ryan still single He has a choking fetish
New Job Opening! Atlanta Falcons Defensive Coordinator

No experience needed!
The Devil went down to Georgia . . . And obviously reneged on his deal with Falcons fans.
I think if I saw God strangle Satan right now... ...it would only be the second biggest choke I've seen tonight.
Who choked harder the Golden State Warriors or the Atlanta Falcons? Hillary Clinton
Dark humor is like food, not everybody gets it.
Abreva The official sponsor of the Lombardi Trophy procession... and all other major sports trophies.
The New England Patriots are perfect. Perfect 5/7. 
Tom Brady and I have one thing in common, We are both now overqualified for our jobs. 
The Mexican triathlon team is already being picked as the favorites for gold in the 2020 Olympics. All of their best runners and swimmers are soon returning home. 
This day will go down in Falcons history..... The day the Falcons won the popular, but lost the electoral.
I got into a fight with my father when I told him Jim Morrison wasn't talented. He forced me to go to my room. I slammed my door behind me, and my dad said, "Don't you ever slam The Doors in my house again!"
What did the Falcons choke on after halftime? Deflated balls
Golden State Warriors "No one can choke harder than we did." Atlanta Falcons "Hold my beer."
Why must you hurry when having sex with your fat fiancée on top? It's a pressing engagement.
Tom Brady needs to improve... He needs to touch-up on his touchdowns. 
You know what Trump and the Patriots have in common? Everyone hates them both, but they both win! 
Whats the best way to fuck up anything? Take it to Atlanta.
To save time we should shorten POTUS to POS
Super Bowl Guess the Falcons were seeing how far hard they could throw a game, not a football...
I haven't seen a team blow a win this bad... Since Hitler invaded Russia
The last time a group of New Englanders destroyed Atlanta this badly Sherman marched to the sea
Congratulations to Tom Brady, the first player to be undefeated over 5+ Super Bowls. He's won all 5/7.
Don't let this Superbowl distract you... from the fact that the Warriors blew a 3-1 lead.
Dady, what is in between mummy's legs? 
- A paradise.
- And what's between your's?
- The key.
- So you should change the lock, because our neighbour has a passkey.

What did the Hacker say to his girlfriend? "I'm in."
My friend keeps saying "Cheer up man it could be worse, you could be stuck in an underground hole full of water" I know he means well...
My wife said that having sex on holiday was the best It certainly wasn't the best postcard I've ever received 
The Tramp's Holiday There was this tramp. One cold winter's morning he was walking along a country road, when he heard a cry for help from a nearby lake.

Without a moment's hesitation he ran out onto the ice and slipped and slided over to a little girl. He managed to pull her out without breaking the ice further and carried her back to the road. He took off his coat and wrapped her in it then began looking for a car to flag down.

Coincidentally the father drives up. "How can I ever thank you sir?" he says after putting his daughter into the warmth of the limo. "Just name your price - I'm a wealthy man."

"Ah, well..." stammers the tramp, "... uh, I'm a little short of cash, perhaps you could help me out."

"Oh dear," says the father, "I don't carry much cash with me, I only have ten pounds - but come home with me and I'll get more from the safe."

"No! No!" says the tramp, "Why ten pounds is more money than I've seen in my whole life - that'll be plenty."

"Ten pounds," thinks the tramp, "I'm rich! I'm rich!" and off he goes to the town to buy himself a holiday.

He finds a travel agent, walks in - much to the disgust of the staff - and goes up to the desk. "I'll have one holiday please!"

"Ahem, which holiday would you like?" asked the girl at the desk, forcing a smile.

"Oh, any holiday I don't mind, anything up to ten pounds," replies the tramp.

"TEN POUNDS! You'll NEVER get a holiday for ten pounds," says the girl incredulously.

She goes into the back of the shop, and searches in the deepest, dustiest filing drawers she can find. There - to her amazement - she finds an old file.

"Well you'll never believe it," she says to the tramp, back in the shop. "I've got you a holiday - its a super-duper, ultra-hyper, mega-economy class round the world cruise - and it costs ten pounds."

"Yippee!" exclaims the tramp, "I'll take it!"

A few days later he arrives at the port, and there in the dock is the most beautiful, most elaborately decorated, most expensive looking ocean-going liner he has ever seen.

"Get off my ship ye dirty bum!" shouts a voice, and an irate captain storms down the gangplank and kicks the tramp down onto the dockside.

"But I've got my ticket!", responds the tramp, "super-duper, ultra-hyper, mega-economy class, and I want on!"

"Well okay," says the captain, "but you can't come on just now, I don't want my first-class passengers seeing you. Come back at midnight when it's dark and I'll let you on then."

So the tramp finds himself a quiet spot among some cargo cases on the dockside, and he falls asleep.

"Psst," says a voice, waking him with a start. It was the captain.

"Hurry up, it's midnight, let's get you to your cabin."

The tramp toddles after the captain, along the dockside, up the gangway, and onto the ship - and what a ship!

First they went down through the first class level: Oriental carpets - 6" pile. A genuine Rembrandt on every wall. Leave your shoes outside for cleaning, and the steward brings a new pair. 24 ct gold trim everywhere.

Then the second class: As above, but perhaps the carpets were only 3" deep, and so on...

3rd, 4th, 5th class, down past the casinos, and the ballrooms, down through the crew's quarters, down through the galleys, and the engine rooms, until finally, at the lowest point in the ship, against the very hull, the captain opens a watertight door into a tiny 7' x 4' cabin, with a hammock, a bedside table, and an alarm clock.

"Sheer luxury!" exclaimed the tramp, "A room of my very own."

"I'm glad you like it," replies the captain, "but there is one more thing... Your class of ticket only allows you to use the facilities of the ship, at night - when all the other passengers are asleep. So that's what the alarm clock is for. Enjoy your cruise."

Well the cruise began, and the tramp had a whale of a time. Sleeping by day, and up on deck at night - he loved it. One-man-tennis, clay pigeon shooting, more food than he'd ever seen...

Then one morning, a week or so into the cruise, the tramp decided he'd have a go on the diving board of the pool. He had just enough time for one dive before he had to go below.

He climbed up the ladder, stepped onto the board tip, bounced, and dived...

... and what a dive...!

Perfectly poised in the air, he hit the water without so much as a ripple.

Now unknown to him, the captain - who'd grown rather fond of the poor old tramp - was standing watching this.

"That was amazing!" exclaimed the captain, "Where did you learn to dive like that?"

"Um, well I've never actually dived before," replied the tramp.

"Well that's incredible!" says the captain, "I've never seen..." He broke off. "Hey, I've got an idea", he started again. "How would you like to train a bit, and we'll put on a show for the other passengers. I'll pay you, and you can then afford to go first class!"

"It's a deal!" says our man. For the next 3 weeks the tramp practices like he's never practiced before. Back-flips, front-flips, triple-back sideways axled dives, you name it he tried it.

Then one morning the captain comes to talk. "Okay, I'd like you to stay in your cabin for the next 2 days. We're going to erect a high diving board for you."

"Okay," agreed the tramp.

Two days passed, and the big day arrived. The ship was humming with excitement. Everyone wanted to see the mystery diver. The captain had provided the tramp with a new pair of swimming trunks and he wore these as he stepped out onto the sun-beaten deck. Gasps of astonishment from the crowd, and a hushed awe. Higher than the eye could see, towering up and up, rose a slender column of metal.

"Well, tramp," said the captain, shaking his hand, "Let's see what you can do." And with that the Captain handed him a walkie talkie. And the tramp began to climb...

up and up...

below him the ship grew smaller...

on and on...

past a solitary albatross...

and still higher...

till the ship was but a speck on the ocean below...

and on still further...

till the ocean grew dim...

and the earth itself...

began to shrink...

past our moon...

and on...

and Mars...

and on...

higher, and higher...

through the asteroid belt...

and on and on towards the diving board...

past the outer planets, until...

on the outermost reaches of the Solar System...

he reached the board.

He climbed on top and radioed the captain...

and then...

he jumped.

Slowly at first,

but speeding up,

faster, and faster,

speeding past Pluto,

and the other outer planets,

through the asteroid belt,

past Mars,

and the moon,

faster,

and faster,

faster - ever faster,

and by now the earth was growing large in the distance, the oceans and land masses grew clear,

faster, and faster,

past the albatross,

double-back somersault,

and he could see the ship, tiny in the distance,

hurtling down now, he posed, ready for the final 500 feet,

Down on the ship the crew strained their necks,

"I CAN SEE HIM!" yelled a passenger, "LOOK!!!"

The tramp streaked down towards the pool, did a last triple flip, and dove...

NOT A RIPPLE ON THE SURFACE!

DOWN THROUGH THE WATER!

SMASHED THROUGH THE POOL BOTTOM!

DOWN THROUGH THE FIRST DECK!

SMASHING THROUGH THE SECOND!

DOWN!

DOWN!

THROUGH THE CREW'S QUARTERS!

THROUGH THE ENGINE ROOMS!

SMASHING THROUGH HIS OWN LITTLE CABIN!

AND DOWN THROUGH THE DOUBLE-STRENGTH STEEL HULL OF THE SHIP!

STILL DOWN...!

DEEPER,

DEEPER INTO THE MURKY DEPTHS,

TILL.........

SMASH!

Into the sea bed, sinking a 37' shaft in the process.

Desperate for air he struggle out of the shaft, his lungs bursting he swam frantically for the surface.

Up and up, desperate, gasping...

Out of the water, up the ladder onto the deck of the ship, into a throng wild with acclaim.

"HERO!" "WONDERFUL!" "AMAZING!" "GOOD SHOW THAT!"

And handing him a heated towel the captain spoke, as a hush fell over the crowd.

"Well tramp, I have NEVER seen anything like that, EVER. That was the most *STUPENDOUS* piece of diving I have ever seen."

The tramp blushed.

The captain went on, "but tell me, most amazing of all is how you survived smashing through this boat after you dived - how did you do it."

And the tramp looked at the captain, and the crowd and replied modestly: "Well you see...

I'm a just poor tramp...

so you must understand...

I've been through many a hard ship in my life."

A Irish man goes to the builders merchant He picks up a tin of paint and brings it over to the counter. The woman behind the till scans it though and said 'would you like a bag for that.' He says: 'ah no it's fine in the tin.'
Which came first? The chicken or the egg? Chicken, the egg just laid there and took it.
A sex toy salesman from the US takes a business trip to Canada The border agent asks "are you going to Canada for business or pleasure". The salesman responds with "I'm here for the business of pleasure".
Donkey weatherman Once upon a time there was a king who wanted to go fishing. He called the royal weather forecaster and inquired as to the weather forecast for the next few hours. The weatherman assured him that there was no chance of rain in the coming days.
So the king went fishing with his wife, the queen.

On the way he met a farmer on his donkey. Upon seeing the king the farmer said, "Your Majesty, you should return to the palace at once because in just a short time I expect a huge amount of rain to fall in this area".
The king was polite and considerate, he replied: "I hold the palace meteorologist in high regard. He is an extensively educated and experienced professional, and I pay him very high wages. He gave me a very different forecast. I trust him and I will continue on my way." So they did.
However, a short time later a torrential rain fell from the sky. The King and Queen were totally soaked and their entourage chuckled upon seeing them in such a shameful condition.

Furious, the king returned to the palace and gave the order to execute the weatherman at once! He summoned the farmer and offered him the prestigious and high paying role of royal forecaster.

The farmer said, "Your Majesty, I do not know anything about forecasting. I obtain my information from my donkey. If I see his ears drooping, it means with certainty that it will rain." So the King hired the donkey on the spot.

And thus began the ancient practice of hiring asses to work in government and occupy its highest and most influential positions..
The Patriots can still win... By Electoral College votes.
God is everywhere. That's why Morgan Freeman is in every seat of the plane.
I hope Tom and Gisele weren't planning on having more kids. He's already firing blanks.
I don't get football.... At the beginning of the game, they flip a quarter to see who kicks off first. Then the rest of the game everybody just keeps trying to "get the quarter back". I mean, it's just a quarter, what's the big deal!?!
The fence and the hurricane There was a hurricane; the aftermath was horrible
There was one man who's only property damage was his fence. So he called the carpenter; and he came over.

Man: "how bad is it?"

Carpenter: "I salvaged some of it but you're going to need to buy some new posts; and I've got other work to attend to so find someone else to do it"

Man: "can you suggest someone?"

Carpenter: "I heard /r/jokes is good at reposting"
The Rooster So this farmer has a rooster named Fabio.


  The farmer walks out one day and Fabio is humping a duck


 The farmer looks over at Fabio and says " Fabio one of these days you are going to screw  yourself to death"


 The next day the farm walks out and sees Fabio humping his goat's leg

  " Fabio one of these days you are going to screw  yourself to death"

 On the 3rd day the farmer walks out to find Fabio humping his horses leg

 " Fabio one of these days you are going to screw  yourself to death"

 Finally on the 4th day the farmer walks out to see vultures circling in the air. Fabio lay there dead.

 The farmer exclaims " I told you that one of these days you were going to screw yourself to death and now look, you've gone an done it"

 At that point Fabio pops his head up slightly to look at the farmer and says
"**SHHHH** they are about to land"
I wonder why dogs get mad when you blow in their faces but as soon as you put them in a car they stick their head out the window.
What‘ s the difference between a pizza and a jew The pizza doesn´t scream when you put it in the oven
"What do you call an educated tube?" and other science jokes! Q: What DO you call an educated tube?

A:A graduated cylinder

Q:Why did the bear dissolve in water?

A:It was polar

Q: How did the English major define microtome?
A: A small book...

Q: Why can`t you trust atoms?

A: They make up everything!

Q: Why did the chicken cross the Mobius strip?

A: To get to the same side!

Q: Why should you use chromosomes in advertisements?

A: Because, you know, sex cells.

I...what am I doing with my life?

A: Procastination!
The Patriots The pats shoulda subbed Bush in, he got more yards on that wheelchair than Blount did all game. #riseup
When you buy a bigger bed... You have more bed room but less bedroom
How many black people does it take to start a riot? Negative 1
The Patriots are like the "German Engineering" of NFL teams But even the Germans make mistakes
My granddad always did say that we were too reliant on technology... I replied, "No, you are grandpa." As I unplugged his life support 
1000 degree fidget spinner vs my neck. The result kept my head rolling! 
A cop threatened to detain me for impersonating a police officer Apparently, "you can't arrest me, I'm a police officer!" wasn't a very good answer.
I once dated a girl who had no pubic hair. She insists she didn't shave or wax and said she wouldn't even be able to afford the supplies on her allowance anyways.
Donald Trump goes parachuting... Donald Trump decides that being president is tiring and decides to take a vacation.

He decides to go parachuting at a resort in Florida. After the pilot straps Donald Trump's parachute onto him, the pilot says "3,2,1... and go!" and Donald Trump jumps of the plane. 

As he enjoys the view below him, he says, "Finally, a joke on /r/jokes where I don't die!"




What's the best kind of fisherman? A master baiter.  
Lel
People say Trump is like Hitler.. except he's not because Hitler actually had a good healthcare plan...
I am looking for a Bank which can perform two things.. give me a Loan and then leave me Alone.
Remember to always check you're grammar. I'm sorry.
If you listen in on a butt dial... Is it called tapping that ass?
Is it just me... or does Tom Brady look really deflated right now?
Never knock on Death's door... Ring the bell and run, he hates that.
And then the fight started. A son asked his mother the following question: 'Mom, why are wedding dresses white?' 

The mother looks at her son and replies: 'Son, this shows your friends and relatives that your bride is pure.'

The son thanks his Mom and goes off to double-check this with his father.

'Dad why are wedding dresses white?'

The father looks at his son in surprise and says:

'Son, all household appliances come in white..
What type of cameras do police officers in the USA like? Point and Shoot
I totally forgot the Super Bowl was tonight! Don't worry; so did the ~~Patriots~~ Falcons. 

EDIT: Well, this is awkward. 
What's Tom Brady's favorite sexual activity? Deflatio
Today my brother and i tried some new water It wasn't bad just basic.

No one knows what Lady Gaga is going to do during the Super Bowl... Because you can't read her poker face.
I don't believe in conspiracy theories I think conspiracy theorists are secretly working together to brainwash us
Watching the super bowl and my wife asks me who I'm cheering for. Wife: "who are you cheering for?"
Me: "the Falcons."
Wife: "are those the red people?"  
Me: "they're called Native Americans now, you racist". 
Mom am I handsome? Son:. Mom, am I handsome?

Mother:. I don't know, ask your girlfriend.

Son: But ,I don't have a girlfriend.

Mother: Then you have your answer.



Five Horses Is Her Name A man asked an American Indian what was his wife's name.
He replied, "She is called Five Horses".

The man said, "That's an unusual name for a wife.
What does it mean?"

The Old Indian answered,
"It old Indian name. It mean ..."


"NAG, NAG, NAG, NAG, NAG!"
Life is like a box of chocolates.... Empty cause I am fat.
In what location are additional entry ways always in demand? Mordor
What is the largest super bowl of them all? Forty.
Two chemists go into a bar. The first one says "I think I'll have an H2O." The second one says "I think I'll have an H2O too" He died shortly after. 
I heard this one from my grandpa There is a white kid an asian kid and a black kid playing together on a playground at school all in the second grade.  The white kid asks if they want to play a game called whose penis is bigger and they all agree. 

So the asian kid whips it out, the other kids say "not bad not bad"

Next the white kid whips his out, and they all agree that it's bigger than the asian kids

Finally, the black kid whips his out and the other two kids are in awe at how much bigger his is

So when the black kid gets home his mother asks him how his day went, and he told her about the game he played with his friends and how he won. So he asked her if it was because he was black. The mom looked at him and said "no, it's because your thirteen"
What have an Ostrich, a Pelican, and the tax man got in common? They can all stick their bills up their arse.

(Credit: Billy Connolly)
Why do some African-Americans have afros? Because it's in their hairitage
A mushroom walks into a bar... Bartender says, "We don't serve mushrooms."

Mushroom says, "But I'm a fun guy."

Bartender says, "I just said we don't serve fungi."

Mushroom says, "No, no, not 'fungi', 'fun guy.' I made a pun."

Bartender says, "Get the fuck out of my bar."
The old turkey hunter There was an old turkey hunter, every year he went on a long hunting trip out of town, and every year the old man brought his wife back a gift.

As the old man drove home he came across an old country store. So he decided to go in and find his wife a gift.

As the old man browsed through the store he came to a large assortment of nuts, so the old man looked to the young clerk and asked "how much is a pound of walnuts", the young clerk replied "they are 7.95". "Jesus Christ good gracious" the old man said, then he looked and said, "what about a pound of your pecans"?

The young clerk said " they are 7.24 sir", "son of a bitch, how the hell" the old man exclaimed. Finally the old man found a plain old bag of goobernuts and he asked the clerk, "ok how much are the goobernuts", the clerk said "they are 4.94".

The old man shaking his head scooped himself a pound of goober nuts and took them up to the register, although the old man had done nothing but complain he said to the young clerk, " I just want to thank you young man, I appreciate how kind you have been. I know that I have a very strange voice and often times people tend to mock me." 

The young clerk merely shook his head " no I want to thank you sir, most people tend to treat me different because of my long and Bulbous nose."

The old man squinted looking at the young clerk.. "you node that's your nose??, fuck me I thought it was your dick your nuts were so freakin high"


"Much funnier when you do the old mans voice in all reality" 
I've seen lots of things on the Super Bowl over the years, like boobs... But this year takes the cake with seeing two bushes. 
My grandma just asked me, "Son, what's your retirement plan?" I said, "It's you."
I took my girlfriend to see her first football game... After the game, I asked her what she thought. She said she liked it, but didn't quite know what all the big to-do was about. Puzzled, I asked her what she meant. She replied: "Well, I keep hearing 'Get the quarterback! Get the quarterback!' It's only 25 cents, why all the fighting?"
Did you all hear about the sick Chemist? If they don't Helium or Curium soon they'll have to Barium 
I don't like to blow my own trumpet. Which is probably why I got removed from the school orchestra. 
Jesus and Moses Sit On A Boat Enjoying Retirement **JESUS** Hey Moses, do you still, you know..... have it?

**MOSES** Have it?

**JESUS** Ya Ya.... You know.... That "trick" you used to do.

**MOSES** Oh buddy, I've still got it.

Moses moves to the front of the boat, shakes out his hands, claps them together and slowly separates them.  The lake parts and the boat sits between two enormous waves. Moses holds the water with extreme precision for a 10 count, and slams the waves back together.

**JESUS** WOW! Not bad for an old timer.

**MOSES** Well listen there J-Star, I wasn't gonna bring it up, but since you started it, do YOU still have it?

**JESUS** Moses...... I'm Jesus Christ. OF COURSE I still have it.  Fundamentally I have to have it or you can't have it, ya know?

**MOSES** Well the shoreline is only about 50 feet, I suppose you could --

Before Moses can get the rest of his sentence out of his mouth, Jesus sets down his wine, casts off his robe, moves to the front of the boat, and takes his first step out into the water...

*SPLASH* Jesus sinks like a stone.  Not ever having to be much of a swimmer, Jesus flails to the surface of the water and Moses reaches overboard and hauls him back up.

**MOSES** What happened ?!?

**JESUS** Last time I did this, I didn't have holes in my feet!
I heard my friend making bird puns and thought... Toucan play at that game.
Did you hear about the Pepsi delivery drivers who were fired? They tested positive for coke.
What did the trilobite say to his girlfriend while they were eating? "Can I trilobite of your food?"

P.S. - my eleven year old sister came up with this 
I told myself I would stop drinking But I'm not about to listen to some retard who talks to himself.
I found a kind of totally tubular vegetable yesterday... It was a rad-ish
An unhappy lonely teenage boy... An unhappy teenage boy decides to ditch school for the first time,  in order to get away from the people who only know he exists is when they are bullying him. He decides to wander the woods near his childhood home. After wandering for a while he comes upon an old,  beat down, shack. It looks empty so he opens the door to explore inside. "Hello", a voice greets him from a dark corner. "I am so sorry! I thought it was abandoned. I'll leave now." he replies,  shocked that someone could live here. "No, no,  please stay a moment. I haven't had company in years." the elderly woman says, with a smile. "Yeah, I guess I can stay, I don't have anywhere else to be." the boy says, returning the smile. They talk for a couple hours before teenage boy has to leave to get home for dinner. "Thank you for being so hospitable. I had a good time" the young man says to his new friend. "I am the one who is truly grateful. Please take these as a gift for your time." she hands him a pair of ugly, colorful, but clean, socks. "Thank you?" he says, confused. "I can't help you make friends with people your own age but these socks may give you some courage to open up more." says the grateful woman. They spend time together at least weekly, and their friendship grows, but the socks remain unused in a drawer. One morning teenage boy has no clean white socks and in a rush to catch the bus put the socks given to him by his elderly friend. When he arrives to school everyone he passes smiles and greets him. "Odd", he thinks. At lunch, the popular kids ask him to sit at their table. Before the end of the lunch hour the prettiest cheerleader in school is kissing his cheek. When he gets home he tosses all his other socks out and puts his lucky ones in the wash. The next morning he puts on his socks and gets on the bus. When he gets back to school everything is back to terrible. He is ignored or bullied all day and anxiously awaits the final bell so he can speak to the old woman and get the socks fixed. When he enters her house he sees a massive bear mauling and eating his friend. "STOP!!! " He yells. "I need her help!! Please stop! " the bear turns to the boy and says.......nothing,  bears don't talk.
How to lose weight while still eating fast food? Buy food from England, you tend to lose a few pounds. 
When A Teacher Asks You If You Did Your Homework Teacher: Did you do your homework?
Student: Did you grade my test?
Teacher:I have other students' tests to grade.
Student: I have other teachers' homework to do.
Why was the Buddhist sad when he was asked to send his resume to the company as a word document via email? Attachment leads to suffering.
Why did the chicken cross the road? To get to the New York Times!
How do you make a magician cry? You make his family disappear.
A turtle is walking across the yard . . . Three snails come up and mug him. Later the cops are asking questions about the mugging:  "Can you describe your attackers?"  The turtle responds, "I don't know, it all happened so fast . . ."
A guy loses an eye on a fishing trip with his friends As he is laying in the hospital bed surrounded by all his family and friends after the surgery, his best friend rushes in the room and says:

-I have great news!! I just ran into the doctor and he said you're not going to lose your eye! 
Everybody in the room turns around and the wounded man asks 
-Are you serious?! 

-Yeah! The doctor said he's going to put it in a jar with Formaldehyde and you get to keep it! 