Enrique Peña Nieto, Malala Yousafzai, and Donald Trump are walking along a beach It's a bit of an oldie, and I think the last time I heard it, it came off as pretty racist. But I think the current political climate allows me to rehash it better. 

Enrique Peña Nieto, who is the Mexican President, is walking along the beach one day with the US President, Donald Trump, and prominent middle eastern human rights activist Malala Yousafzai. 

They happen to come across a lamp, and of course what anyone does when they discover a random lamp, they each give it a good rub and out pops an all-powerful genie. 

"3 Of you have awoken me! But I have only 3 wishes to give!" Shouts the Genie. "I will give each of you 1 wish, choose wisely!"

Enrique speaks up first, "Oh magical Genie! I'd like Mexico to become a wealthy and strong nation! I want to be able to provide for our people and keep them safe from the Cartels! I want the economy in our country to be strong enough that families need not leave in order to find jobs. I want Mexican culture to flourish such that people are proud to be Mexican and can come home and celebrate with all of their friends and family!"

*Poof* - and just like that, the Mexican Peso surges past the US Dollar, and all the Mexican immigrants in America are rushing back to Mexico to work more lucrative jobs. Even now in fact, some Americans are illegally crossing the border trying to get jobs in the new world economic superpower. 

Malala goes next. "Genie, please! I wish that there was peace in the middle east! That all of Pakistan, India, Iraq, Iran, Syria, Libya... All of it! I wish that everyone could come to their senses and stop fighting for power, and instead work towards bettering their own societies. Education and equality for all, men, women, and children! Allow those of any  faith, be that Muslim, Jew, Hindu, Christian, Buddhist, whatever they wish to believe - allow them to live harmoniously together and bring about a peaceful revolution to world. 

*Poof* - and just like that, all across the middle east a sense of calm crosses the land. People set aside their differences and come to understand one another. New glorious Multi-faith temples arise that attract pilgrims and tourists, and Schools and Universities spring up all over - creating a new intellectual hub of the world. People from all over are trying to get into these prestigious schools to learn from the greatest minds, and this open and safe mix of cultures creates a near utopia like region of the globe.

Last is Donald Trump. As he's checking his twitter and other online news feeds, he sees that America has fallen from great heights. All of the low-income workforce has left the country, and those with the means to leave the country have done so to move on to greener pastures. What's left is a mess of those too impoverished to leave or too proud or uneducated to see why they should.

Donald Trump takes a look at all of this, then turns to the genie and says, "Well, so long as the Mexicans and Muslims are gone, I'll just take a Pepsi." 
Trump walks into the Oval office, turns to his administrative team and says, “I want to organise the deportation of 10,000 Muslims and one kitten. Everyone looks around the table and, after a long silence, Mike Pence says. “Mr. President, why do you want to deport a kitten?” Trump smiles and turns to the rest of the table. “You see, no one cares about the Muslims.”
Life is like toilet paper... You're either on a roll.....or you're taking shit from some asshole.
For every dollar that a man makes, a woman makes 70 cents. That's not fair. The man is only left with 30.
Genders are like the twin towers There used to be 2 of them, but now it is a sensitive topic.
You know what, those protests changed my mind I thought only some of them didn't have jobs but now I think all of the protestors don't have jobs.
I came out of the closet to my mom today but she told me I hadn't completely cleaned up so I had to go back in
The audible adverts are telling me to feel every word... But that would make me a literal sex offender
Speeding ticket Driver: "What am i supposed to do with this speeding ticket?"

Officer: "Keep it, When you get four of them, You get a bicycle!"
What kind of cookies do monkeys make? Chocolate chimp cookies
I brought a large amount of sperm off the internet last night, I shouldn't of done it but you know what they say, Sex cells 
Potassium texted Sodium asking to go for coffee Sodium just said Na. 

Potassium replied K. 
How do blind people learn about sex? The hands on way
Long A primary school class has just returned to school after the summer vacation. The teacher asks them, one by one, to come up to the blackboard and draw something exciting that happened during their holidays. First up was Jimmy. Jimmy draw a series of diagonal lines across the blackboard. What's that supposed to be Jimmy? asks the teacher.  Well, Miss, we were out for a walk and it started to rain so hard that we all got soaked instantly, and this is a picture of the rain. Very good Jimmy says the teacher.   
Next up to the board was Sally. Sally drew a series of jagged lines down the board. What's that Sally ?  Well Miss, we were out for a stroll in the forest and suddenly a thunderstorm came up and the lightning struck several trees, and that's what these jagged lines are.  That's very exiting Sally, well done.   
Lastly Bobby goes to the front and draws a single dot on the board. The teacher asks what's exciting about a dot, Bobby?   
That's not a dot, Miss, it's a period !   
Well then, what's exiting about a period ?   
I don't really know, Miss, but my elder sister has just missed hers and the entire family is excited about it.
I went to the doctors I have been having a lot of trouble reading lately so I went to the doctors. After a few tests he gave me a paper with my diagnosis and I apparently have something called "Lexdysia".
Thanksgiving Day... It was the week before thanksgiving and a little kid heard his parents arguing, although he couldn't hear much, he made out the words "Bitch" and "Bastard". So he goes up to his Dad and says "Daddy, What is a bastard?" And his Dad replies "Oh sweety, it is just another word for gentlemen. Later that day, he goes up to his Mom and says "Mommy, What is a bitch?" And his Mom replies "Honey, it is just another word for women"


Two days later the kid is sitting downstairs watching television when he hears his parents arguing again, although he still can't hear much, he makes out the words "Penis" and "Vagina". Not knowing what these words mean, he plans to ask his parents. He decides to ask his Mom first, he walks up to her and says "Mommy, what is a vagina?" His Mom, who didn't know what to say, looked around the the first thing she saw was a coat, so she said "Honey, it is just another word for coat". Satisfied with that answer, the little kid decides to ask his dad what a "Penis" is. So he waks up to his Dad and says "Daddy, What is a penis?" His Dad, looks around the room and the first thing he sees is a hat, so he says "It is just another word for hat" The little kid satisfied with his answer, leaves and goes back to the television.


It is the morning of thanksgiving and the little kids parents gave him a very important job, to welcome the guests. But, it was still early and no one had arrived yet. All of a sudden he hears his dad scream "SHIT". His Dad had cut himself shaving. The little kid runs up to his dad and asks "What does shit mean?" And his Dad replies "It is just a type of shaving cream". An hour later he hears his Mom yell "FUCK", she had cut her finger while she was cutting the turkey. The little kid runs up to his Mom and asks if she is ok and asks "What does fuck mean?" His mom says back "Honey, it is just a way of cutting the turkey".


So the guests arrive, and the kid goes to welcome them and says in his most gentleman like way, "Welcome Bitches and Bastards, may I have your penises and vaginas? My Dad is upstairs wiping shit off his face, and my Mom is fucking the turkey."
On my 16th birthday, my family tried to surprised me with a car But they missed
Can you spare just $2.00? Ranji is a 9yr old living in Namibia, he only has 1 leg, 1 eye and 1 arm. Each day he has to ride 7 miles to school along a narrow road on a rusty bike with bent wheels, no brakes and only one pedal.... If you send just $2.00, you get the video for it. It's fucking hilarious.
A fine-looking gentleman sat down in the main dining room of an expensive restaurant.  He ordered a big dinner and spent an hour enjoying himself.

After he was given the check, he summoned the headwaiter.

"Ah, my friend," he said, "that was a delicious meal! Perhaps you don't remember that I was a guest at this same table just about a year ago. And at that time I couldn't pay the check, so you, sir had me thrown out in full view of all the other diners."

"I am so sorry, sir," said the head waiter, "but, you understand..."

"Oh it's quite all right," interrupted the gentleman, "but I'm afraid I'll have to trouble you again.
When I see lovers' names carved in a tree, I don't think its cute... I just think it's crazy how many people bring knives on a date.
How to workers at IHOP start their shift? One foot at a time
Two blondes are walking through the woods when they came across a set of tracks The first blonde says, "those are deer tracks"
The second replies, "No those are moose tracks"
"No, deer tracks"
"No, moose tracks"
"Deer tracks!"
"Moose tracks!"
"DEER TRACKS!"
"MOOSE TRACKS!"
They were still arguing when the train hit them.
A nun in a pub A nun, really needing to go to the bathroom, walked into a neighborhood pub. The place was hopping with music and dancing but every once in a while the lights would turn off. Each time after the lights would go out the place would erupt into cheers. However, when the revelers saw the nun, the room went dead silent. She walked up to the bartender, and asked," May I please use the restroom?"

The bartender replied, "I really don't think you should."

"Why not? " the nun asked.

"Well, there is a statue of a naked man in there, and his most private part is covered only by a fig leaf. "

"Nonsense," said the nun, "I'll just look the other way."

So the bartender showed the nun the door at the top of the stairs, and she proceeded to the restroom. After a few minutes, she came back out, and the whole place was hopping with music and dancing again. However, they did stop just long enough to give the nun a loud round of applause.

She went to the bartender and said, "Sir, I don't understand. Why did they applaud for me just because I went to the restroom?"

"Well, now they know you're one of us," said the bartender. "Would you like a drink?"

"But, I still don't understand," said the puzzled nun.

"You see," laughed the bartender, "every time the fig leaf is lifted on the statue, the lights go out in the whole place. Now, how about that drink, Sister ??"
Have you heard about the magic tractor? It went down the road and turned into a field.
Why are don't black folks go on cruise? They are not falling for that again. 
#69: (NSFW) Why did the chicken give her anal? To take her to the other side. 
One week into his administration, Donald Trump's top aide walks into his office... "Sir, your new policies have been a success. We've already deported three Brazilian immigrants!"

"Great, there can't be many left then!"
An African man was found lying on the ground with a grain of rice next to him in the morning, what happened? He was vomiting the whole night.
What do you call an orangutan holding a spoon? I don't know I was asking you
Why does everyone think Trump is gonna start WW3? If anything, with today's weaponry he'd start Cold War Part II
Who do you not want to see with a tampon? The Kool-Aid Man
Why do gamers say "get shit on"? Because they rectum
How many times does 34 go into 16? I don't know, ask Joey Buttafuoco. 
Which is the most curious planet? Tellus
Don't be sad Because sad backwards is das, and das is nicht gut
The Chinese are celebrating the year of the rooster Meanwhile the Americans are celebrating the year of the cock
I'm guessing Trump has been Rick Rolled too many times ... Because he just gave you up, let you down and deserted you. 


What is the difference between men and women? A woman wants one man to satisfy her every need. A man wants every woman to satisfy his one need.
I knew ED stood for Erectile Disfunction. Just realized it also means Executive Disorder. Pretty much the same thing. 
A man walks into a bar. 
A man walks into a bar. His alcohol dependency is tearing his family apart.
I like my women like I like my steak. Dead. 
TIL I know more words than Shakespeare Shakespeare. Albatross. Conglomerate. Sasquatch. Carnival. I have more...
My wife accused me of being immature... So i told her to get out of my fort, because she didn't know the password.
Suppositories A woman hears her husband cussing up a storm From behind the bathroom door.
She knocks and asks, 'honey ,what is it?' Her husband emerges from the bathroom and says, 'The doctor prescribed suppositories for this stomach problem I've been having and no matter what I do, I just can't get the sucker up my ass. Even the doctor had to shove the first one in to show me how it was done, and I tell you it took him forever to get it up there, and it hurt!' 'Poor baby,' says the wife. 'You were probably nervous and tense and he probably wasn't very gentle with you. Here, let me give you the suppository, I don't mind.' Still grumbling, the husband bends over. His wife puts her left hand on his shoulder to brace him and with the right hand, quickly and easily slips the suppository up her husbands rear end. The husband lets out a bloodcurdling scream. 'My god' says the wife. 'What happened? Did I hurt you?' 'No!' Cries the man,'but I just remembered that when the doctor did it, he had BOTH his hand on my shoulders.
Friends Her:
-Do you have any friends?

Him:
-You bet, all seasons, on DVDs.
A woman goes into a forest. If a woman goes into the forest and makes a sound, and there isn't a man there to hear her, is she still wrong?
Do you ever get that feeling like your being watched? 'Cause if it's bothering you I'll stop. 

*Edit*: It's supposed to be you're. I'm know I'm stupid. You can stop telling me.
Whats better than winning silver in the special olympics? Not being disabled
Smoking seriously harms you and others around you So smoke casually for the sake of public health
Why does Beyonce sing "To the left, to the left"? Because she has no rights.
A blonde, brunette, and redhead are each pregnant and at the doctor's office... While sitting in the waiting area, they begin chatting.

The brunette says "I was on the bottom so I'm having a girl!"
The redhead says "I was on top so I'm having a boy!"
The blonde starts crying hysterically.
The brunette and redhead ask her what's wrong.
The blonde says "I'm going to have a puppy!"
Why don't you eat pussy in the morning? You ever tried to open a grilled cheese sandwich?
What do Tyler1 and the Earth have in common? They're both perpetually tilted.

What's the difference between Tyler1 and Earth?

Earth isn't toxic to all known life. : ^ )
So I'm studying..... FOR MY PROSTATE EXAM!!! 
[X-Post Dad Jokes] Nobel Prize Hellen finally got a job in a hotel as a receptionist and this is a story of her first day. 

While waiting, someone came in to the hotel. The person who came in was had a huge belly and he approached Hellen on the counter. Hellen was rather nervous, she greeted him. 

Hellen: "how may i help you sir?" 

Man: "yes, can you help me with something?" 

Hellen is beginning to feel scared and asked. 

Hellen: "help you with?"

The man approached her even closer and asked. 

Man: "am i fat?" 

He whispered. 

Hellen did not know how to respond to that question and tried to speak honestly without offending him. 

Hellen: "well sir... I think you are just fine sir. Maybe a bit big"

The mans face goes red and immediately grabs the bell on the counter and ran outside and threw it to the roof with all his might before running away from the hotel. 

Hellen called the manager and explained what happened and soon the manager arrived and stood beside Hellen outside the hotel. Both of them stared at the bell stuck on the roof. 

The manager lets out a big sigh and said. 

Manager: "well.... I guess we could settle for a No-Bell Prize"
This must be Reddit's most eco-friendly sub... 99% recycled content.
A five year old boy was detained at a US airport for hours because he posed a security threat. Makes sense. What better assassin to kill a 5 year old president? 

Credit: /u/mattholomew
"say his TRUE name 3 times with me children!" "Trumpleforeskin!
Trumpleforeskin!
Trumpleforeskin!"

And just like that, the evil troll in the White House crumpled into a pile of dust!
Why do Java developers wear glasses? Because they don't C#
TIFU by accidentally turning on the speakers connected to my pc (porn) instead of turning on the stereo ones... ...whoops, wrong sub
What did the egg say to the frying pan? You crack me up!
What do you call a Mexican with no protein? No Whey José
I don't know what's worse... Saying "It will only take 10 seconds" to get my wife to sleep with me or the fact that it's true.
Three men are being interviewed for a job at the same time The interviewer says "Alright, you can get the job if you can come up with a sentence with the words green, pink and yellow."

First man replies "Well that's easy, my favorite colors are green, pink and yellow."

Interviewer smiles and says "You're hired!"

The second man scoffs and says "I saw a bird that was green, pink and yellow."

Interviewer says "You got it!"

Finally, the third man thinks for a while until he says "The phone rang green green, I pinked it up and said yellow!"

The end.
When The Devil Tries To Buy My Soul I'm Going To Show Him Pure Evil. Going to give him a 40p card charge
A soldier ran up to a nun A soldier ran up to a nun. Out of breath he asked, "Please, may I hide under your skirt. I'll explain later."
The nun agreed...
A moment later two Military Police ran up and asked, "Sister, have you seen a soldier?"
The nun replied, "He went that way."
After the MPs ran off, the soldier crawled out from under her skirt and said, "I can't thank you enough, sister. You see, I don't want to go to Syria."
The nun said, "I understand completely."
The soldier added, "I hope I'm not rude, but you have a great pair of legs!"
The nun replied, "If you had looked a little higher, you would have seen a great pair of balls…. I don't want to go to Syria either."
What does the Japanese Jesus say after praying? Ramen 
The children were lined up in......... The children were lined up in the cafeteria of a Catholic elementary school for lunch. 
At the head of the table was a large pile of apples. 
The nun made a note, and posted on the apple tray,
"Take only one. God is watching."
Moving further along the lunch line, at the other end of the table was a large pile of chocolate chip cookies. 
One child whispered to another, "Take all you want. 
God is watching the apples."
What do you call 2000 mockingbirds? 2kilo mocking birds. 
I am thinking of selling my vacuum cleaner. Well...it spends all it's day collecting dust
A man sees a hot nun... One day a man gets on a bus and sees a really hot nun. So by rule of nature, he goes and sits beside her. After numerous attempts of trying to chat her up, she gets fed up and gets off the bus abruptly in a huff. The bus driver says to the man 'I know that nun, she prays at the church every day at 8pm'.

So the man has an idea. He thinks that if he can convince the nun that he is God, she will have sex with him. So later that day, the man puts on his best God costume and heads off to the church. As soon as he arrives, the nun jumps into her arms and screams 'take me with you!'. With a smug look on his face he says 'of coarse, but first you must prove your loyalty by having sex with me'. The nun then says 'alright, but can we do anal?' The man, with his manhood already expanding, willingly agrees.

An hour passes. A whole hour of rough, sweaty, passionate sex, they are both lying in bed, completely exhausted. Suddenly, unable to contain himself, the man rips off his God mask and says 'Ha! I tricked you! It's the man from the bus!' The nun then rips off her mask and exclaims ' Ha! The joke's on you! It's me, the bus driver!
Three men were relieving their pressure at the urinal. Three men were relieving their pressure at a urinal.

The guy in the middle looks at the guy on his left and to his surprise he can see two streams coming out from down below. "What's up with that stream?" He asked curiously.

"I am a var veteran, and in battle a grenade blew off close to me causing a tiny fragment to hit the tip of my penis. Thus the stream" The guy replied.

Then the guy in the middle then looks at the guy to his right and sees three beams coming out from down below. "What's up with your stream then?" He asked curiously again.

"I am a var veteran too, and in battle a bullet penetrated the lower part of my stomach forcing me to undergo surgery. What you see is a result of that surgery" The guy replied.

Then both men on each side look at the guy in the middle and to their surprise they see 13 streams coming out from down below. "Oh, so you are a war veteran too?" One of them asks. 

"Nah. Just fucking stuck in the zipper!"
An Englishman, an Aussie and a Scotsman are at a bar An Englishman, an Aussie and a Scotsman are at a bar, all having a beer.

A fly lands in the Englishmans beer, he pushes the beer away with a look of disgust and orders a new one.

A few minutes later another fly lands in the Aussies beer. He flicks the fly out and continues drinking.

Eventually a fly lands in the Scotsmans beer. He reaches in, pulls it out and holds it over his glass, hitting the back of it and starts shouting "Spit it out ya little bastid!"
Love him or hate him at least President Trump is raising awareness of one of the greatest challenges facing America..... ....Mental Health. 'Cause either that dude is crazy or I am and my best guess is before all this is said and done we're all going to need a little therapy.  
What's our boy Donald's favorite instrument? The *trump*et

I'll see myself out promptly
What did Trump tell Yates? You're fired.
A wife is like a hand grenade... Take off the ring and say good bye to your house.
Why did the bear have to go to the hospital Because he was bearly alive!
What's the difference between Nazi camp and terrorist camp? Concentration required.
What's the difference between a comma and a cat? One has a pause at the end of a clause and the other has claws at the end of its paws.
Damn girl, your ass is like a treasure chest. Ah thank you. But why?

It's well hidden.
Wth is a mellon baller? Is that like a cantaloupe with an uzi?
I was at a retro night down at the club The DJ played "The Twist", so I did the twist. Then he played "The Macarena", and I did the Macarena. When he played "Come on Eileen", that's when the police arrested me.
My mother used to always say "give your food a rinse before you eat it." Lovely woman. Terrible sandwiches.
What do you get when you cross a horror film with a reality TV show? The evening news
I asked my friend in North Korea how life was He said he can't complain
Say what you like about Hitler, because he's dead and can't complain.
You know what kind of tree I would be? A knotty Pine
On the eighth day God said: -Widescreen is the best for humanity. Sony 16:9.
What does opening an ideal bar and making a woman happy have in common? Take care of 2 things, liquor in the front, poker in the back.
A man inserted an 'ad' in the classifieds: "Wife wanted." Next day he received a hundred letters.

They all said the same thing: "You can have mine."
The other day Jon Snow was talking about Reddit. It turns out he knows kn0thing.
What kind of meat does a catholic priest eat on Friday? Nun
Be careful about what you buy online If you buy stuff online, please check out the seller very carefully. One of my friends just lost $300 plus taxes on a penis enlarger.

The bastard sent him a magnifying glass and the only instruction came along with was "DO NOT USE IN SUNLIGHT".
How do you turn a normal joke into an american joke? Fucking unnecessarily add "fucking" as much as fucking possible.
Apart from humans, the only creature that has sex for pleasure is the dolphin... Do you know how many animals I had to screw to find that out?
Buzzfeeds top 10 list of torture methods Number 7 will shock you 
What does a horny terrorist do? He blows himself.
Shower pom A little girl was showering with her mom when she noticed her mom has hair between her legs and asks her what that is. Her mom tells her it's a special shower pom that she can use to clean herself with.

Few days later the little girl runs excitedly to her mom and says "mommy I've figured out another use for your special shower pom!" The mother is confused and asks what does she mean, the little girl then replied "I saw daddy clean his teeth with the babysitter's pom the other day!"
A particle physicist met a quark collector... ... and discovered the latter, named Richard, had managed to get his hands on two of the most elusive quarks - the notorious up-quark and the sought-after down-quark.

Now the physicist was a bit of a connoisseur himself, and had managed to get his hands on all the four other quarks and their anti-quarks: he caught the ever-fleeting top quark near the last base camp on the Mount Everest, had discovered the appealing Charm quark in a beauty contest in Nevada, only barely managed to escape with the Strange quark from a sect of occult satanists and built his own bathyscape to collect a Bottom quark from the Mariana Trench.

He had long sought after the two remaining specimens to complete his collection, but to no avail. So he was delighted at first, but the quark collector was not ready to part with his ornaments.
Our physicist first tried to appeal to Rich's generosity, by pleading him to give him the up-quark. He was however rudely refused.

He then tried a different angle: he offered to hire the down quark for a short period (and an outrageous sum of money, let it be said), hoping to appeal to Rick's greed, but alas.
After weeks of pleading, begging, raging and convincing, he sent one final e-mail asking for either the top quark to be given or the down to be borrowed.
The next day, he received this email:

'Never gonna give you up, never gonna let you down...'
Do you know the punishment for bigamy? Two mothers-in-law.
What's the difference between a grandfather clock and your grandma's favourite breakfast? The letter L
If you eat a sub sandwich on a submarine, what do you eat on a train? A pastrainmi sandwich.
I asked a sailor for directions to a brothel. [NSFW] He pointed to a building and said "Thar she blows" 
I went to a library and asked for a book on suicide The librarian replied "Fuck off! You won't bring it back!"
My dwarf girlfriend went to work this morning upset with me. My dwarf girlfriend went to work this morning upset with me, because I've been taking the piss out of her size. So I'm going all out to make it up to her tonight.
I've got a good bottle of wine in and bought her the latest dvd box set of her favourite programme. When she gets in from work I'm going to order her favourite takeaway for her tea, then go upstairs and run her a nice hot sink.


Yesterday I crashed my car into a midget He got out and said "I'm not happy"
I replied "Which one are you then?"
What good did the Trump administration do for the American public? Public health.
With all the marches Trump triggers, the average American person has never been more fit
Science have confirmed that humans can consume extremely poisonous materials and even drink molten lava **Once**
I threw my sandal at the light switch to turn it off, but I missed.. It was a complete flip - flop
How is this possible? Whenever I say something bad, I get in trouble, but... Whenever Donald Trump says something bad, he gets more supporters!?
What's the difference between Soviet Russia and Deadpool? In Soviet Russia, x find you

In Deadpool, X Gon' Give It To Ya
What's Donald Trumps favorite song? ICE ICE baby
One of the cakes is missing from my German cake stall... ... I'm worried that it was stollen.


I hate libras Them and their media are destroying this country!
Why isn't Batman black? Because then he wouldn't be able to go to a store without Robin'.
If you ever feel like your life is meaningless and pointless Just remember that someone out there is fitting indicators on BMWs
What do you call a Chinese anti-vaxxer? Wu Ping Coff
Three vampires sit in a cave in the black of night, sharing a drink, laughing, and generally having a good time that one would not associate with the undead. The night grew longer, and an observer, should they be careful enough, would learn that vampires can indeed get drunk.

Eventually, the three begin to bicker about which of them is the most powerful and deadly.

The youngest suddenly gets up, and flies off into the night. Almost instantly, he returns in a huge flock of bats. His hands are covered in blood.

With a cackle, he points down the road.

"You see that abandoned coach down there? I slaughtered everyone in it! The driver, a nobleman and his wife, their three sons, and a guardsman! All dead in the blink of an eye!"

The second, older than the first, but younger than the last, scoffs. "Child's play. Watch this." And disappears with the wind. Even with his heightened senses, the younger could not follow his movements.

The second vampire reappeared as suddenly as he had vanished, and the gust of his speed knocked the youngest to the ground. His hands, mouth, and collar were caked with gore. He gestures towards a town in the distance. As the vampires watched, a building lit on fire, and fell onto another one. Soon, the entire town was alight, but no movement could be seen from the townsfolk at all.

"A hundred people in that town! All dead! Torn to shreds!"

The youngest was in awe, but the eldest of the three only chuckled amusedly.

"How cute." He says.

The second looks almost indignant. "I'd like to see you do better."

The third lets out a malevolent chuckle.

"Very well."

He gets up, dusts off his cloak, and puts his spectacles down on a rock.

He disappears with a **CRACK.** The other two vampires' jaws dropped at the impossible speed that the eldest flew at.

Another resounding **CRACK** filled the air as the eldest vampire returned to the cave. His cloak was in tatters. His clothes were disheveled. But most prominent was the blood. His entire body was covered in blood. Never would the other vampires imagine that so much blood could cling to one person.

The eldest lets out a sigh, and plops to the ground. He reaches for his glasses, and cleans them with what remains of his cloak.

The younger vampires look at each other, not sure whether to break the silence.

Finally, the youngest asks, "So...?"

The elder vampire looks up slowly. He murmurs,

"You see that massive tree over there? The one with the widest trunk, as thick as a man is tall?"

Baffled, the youngest replied, "...Yes?"

The eldest, sheepishly, continued.

"Well, I didn't."
What's the difference between a circus and a strip club? The circus has cunning stunts.
A man goes to the confessional at church Man: Father i have sinned.

Father: What have you done my son?

Man: I had sex with my wife.

Father: That is not a sin, you are married to this woman.

Man: I know, but I did it from behind.

Father: My son, that is fine, the Lord understands human needs.

Man: But father, i did it while her head was in the freezer.

Father: As long as it was consensual between you and your wife you have not sinned. Go now and say a Hail Mary and the Lords Prayer.

Man: Thank you father.. Oh and I would recommend that you dont buy any frozen veg at the supermarket, they banned us for some reason... 
My name is Ezra. Spelling my name is easy... r, a
What's the difference between a Pakistani hospital and a terrorist camp? We don't fund hospitals in Pakistan
A horse learns the guitar So there once was a horse that wanted to learn how to play the guitar. So he goes around looking for someone to teach him, and soon he finds someone to teach him. After a white, the horse get REALLY good at playing the guitar so he tells his friend Duck about how he learned the guitar.

So the Duck says to him, "Wow that's pretty damn amazing considering you don't have fingers. I was thinking of learning to play the drums, you've inspired me to learn!" So the Duck went on Craigslist to find a drums teacher and soon he learns to play the drums REALLY well and decides to tell his friend Goat about his experience.

So the Goat says to him, "Wow that's pretty damn amazing. I was thinking of taking singing lessons because I feel like I have a really unique voice! You've inspired me to get singing lessons!" So the Goat goes and pays his friend Pig to teach him how to sing and after a few months, he learned how to sing really well.

So the three of them decides to start a band because they were all very skilled and passionate about their music. They started landing small gigs here and there, playing at kids birthday parties, until they land this huge gig in Seattle! This gig was going to be their big break!

Goat spent all his money on singing lessons so he had to to take the train to Seattle instead of flying with the rest of his band mates. Unfortunately, Horse couldn't make it to Seattle because his mom was dying and he had to go see her one more time. 

The Horse's mom ends up passing away and he falls into a depression. Right as he's driving back to his apartment, he hears on the radio that there was a terrorist attack on his friend Duck's plane and everyone is dead! He also learns when he got home that the train his friend Goat was on derailed and crashed into a wall, there were no survivors. 

At this point the Horse is just spiraling and spiraling out of control. He soon develops a drinking habit. 

After awhile he runs out of alcohol so he walks into a bar. And the the bartender asks, "Why the long face?"
What's brown and sticky? Crap, I forgot the punchline.
What did the blanket say when it fell of the bed? Oh Sheeet!
Why has nobody heard of the new band 1023 megabits? They don't have any gigs.
What happens to a frog's car when it breaks down? It gets toad away.
Two peasants turned vampire hunters entered the local cemetery.... ...Looking for the dreaded vampire that threatened their homes. As they searched among the tombstones, they found one covered in blood, black as night and decorated with a bat motif. As night fell, they begun excavating it, getting to the coffin just as the last rays of the sun began to disappear. They threw it open, stakes at the ready but found it empty. Off to the right, a small ordinary tombstone began to tremble and out burst the vampire! As he closed on the helpless pair he laughed saying, "Ah-HA! You fools! You have made a *grave mis-stake!*"

*sorrynotsorry*
What's the difference between Muslim and a terrorist? I don't know, I just sign executive orders.

I'll be here all week.
Its not a Muslim ban. Trump: "Its not a Muslim ban there are plenty of other Muslim countries that weren't banned. Its definitely not a Muslim ban"
Darth Bannon: "No its not but its a good start"
Hi do you kill a blonde? Put a scratch and sniff sticker at the bottom of a pool!
If you were stranded on a desert island, what would you bring with you? I would take one for the team and bring Donald Trump.
A Muslim, a Mexican, and Trump are walking down the beach..... ....when the Muslim stubs his toe on a lamp. The Mexican picks it up, and Trump rubs it. Out of the lamp comes a Genie saying "the three of you have set me free, so shall the three of you be granted a wish." The Muslim says, "I wish for all my Muslim people to be happy, healthy, and at home in the Middle East." *Poof* all the Muslim people are back in the Middle East. The Mexican says, "I wish for all my Mexican people to be happy, healthy, and at home in Mexico." *Poof* all the Mexican people are back in Mexico. Trump then looks at the Genie and asks, "All the Muslims and Mexicans are out of America?" The Genie responds, "Yes, they are all happy, healthy, and at home." Trump narrows his eyes and growls, "Build the walls."
They say comedy comes from a dark place. That's why farts are so funny.
My son told me he's transgender... So that makes me transparent!
What's long and hard and full of seamen? A submarine, you pervs.
Hi Reddit. I am David Miller, head of the American Lung Foundation. Asthma anything
A blonde, a redhead and a brunette are stranded on an island... Suddenly, the brunette spots land not far from the island. 

She tells the other two: "I'll swim there and come back with help" 

But as she is swimming, she gets tired a quarter of the way there and swims back.

The redhead says: "Don't worry, I'm confident in my ability to swim there and come back with help"

But she gets tired a third of the way there and swims back.

The blonde says: "You guys are weak. I'm sure I can get there and come back"

But she gets tired halfway there, turns around and swims back!
An Old Tamil Joke An elephant befriends an ant. One day, they decide to take a walk. They're chatting and having a fun time when the elephant is suddenly hit by a car. The drivers rushes off, leaving the badly injured elephant bleeding helplessly. 

Blood pours out of his wounds at an alarming rate, but the ant still tries to reassure his friend. 

"We can go to the hospital! They can save you." The ant promises. 

"I'll die from blood loss before we get there." 

"Don't worry," the ant says. "I'll donate my blood!" 
I know how it feels to be a noble gas. No one wants to bond with me.
Why do stars make such good comedians?  Because they're gas!
Does your asshole every get jealous... Of the amount of shit that comes out of your mouth?
Dirty I like my women how i like my wood dead and wet 
A little three year old boy is sitting on the toilet A Little Three Year Old Boy Is Sitting On The Toilet. His Mother Thinks He Has Been In There Too Long, So She Goes In To See What's Up. The Little Boy Is Sitting On The Toilet Reading A Book. But About Every 10 Seconds Or So He Puts The Book Down, Grips Onto To The Toilet Seat With His Left Hand And Hits Himself On Top Of The Head With His Right Hand.
His Mother Says: "billy, Are You All Right?you've Been In Here For A While...
Billy Says: "i'm Fine, Mommy.. I Just Haven't Gone 'doody' Yet."
Mother Says: "ok, You Can Stay Here A Few More Minutes.but, Billy, Why Are You Hitting Yourself On The Head?"
Billy Says: "works For Ketchup."
What three, two letter words, mean small? Is it in?
Did you hear about the two fruits who wanted to run away and get married? Turns out they cantaloupe.
What's an oyster's favorite band? Pearl Jam.
January is national stalking awareness month... That crept up on my fast 
Arguing with a woman is like reading the Software License Agreement In the end, you ignore everything and click "I Agree".
A Mexican man has been running away from the cops for 3 days... The authorities stated that he is a Juan-ted man
If a centi-peed a pint, how much would a precipice piss? A sheer drop.
Husband sent a text to wife at night Husband sent a text to wife at night,
“Hi I will get late, plz try and wash all my dirty clothes
And make sure you prepare my favorite dish before I return.”
He sent another text, “I forgot to tell u that I got an increase in
My salary at the end of month I’m getting u a new car”
She text back, “Omg really?”
Husband Replied: “No I just wanted to make sure u got my 1st msg.”

I bought my blind friend a cheese grater for his birthday... A week later, he told me it was the most violent book he ever read.
I'm reading an interesting book about Electromagnetic Levitation I can't put it down 
I can think of one benifit global warming might bring... LA will be under water if we keep it up.
Two guys, an American and an Indian sitting in a bar are taking shots one after the other.

The Indian said to the American, "You know my parents are forcing me to get married to this so called homely girl from a village whom I haven't even met once. We call this arranged marriage. I don't want to marry whom I don't love, so I told that frankly to my parents and now I'm having a lot of family problems."

The American turned wearily towards the Indian and said, "I'm married to a widow whom I dated for 3 years and loved deeply. After a couple of years, my father fell in love with my step-daughter and married her, so my father became my son-in-law and I became my father's father-in-law. Legally now my daughter is my mother and my wife is my grandmother. More problems occurred when I had a son. My son is my father's brother and so is my uncle. Situations turned worse when my father had a son. Now my father's son, my brother is my grandson. Ultimately, I have become my own grandfather and I'm my own grandson. And you say you have family problems"

The Indian fainted!!!!
The Mexican cartel asked a hacker for help Hacker: Sorry guys, I can't crack this.
Has anyone tried... Turning Donald Trump off and then on again?
Is it because I'm blonde? A girl came skipping home from school one day.
"Mommy, Mommy," she yelled, "we were counting
today, and all the other kids could only count to
four, but I counted to 10. See? 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10!"
"Very good," said her mother.
"Is it because I'm blonde?" the girl said.
"Yes, it's because you're blonde," said the mommy.
The next day the girl came skipping home from
school. "Mommy, Mommy," she yelled, "we were
saying the alphabet today, and all the other kids
could only say it to G, but I said it to N. See?
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L M, N!"
"Very good," said her mother.
"Is it because I'm blonde, Mommy?"
"Yes, it's because you're blonde."
The next day the girl came skipping home from
school. "Mommy, Mommy," she yelled, "we were
in gym class today, and when we showered, all
the other girls had flat chests, but I have these!"
She lifted her tank top to reveal a fully developed
chest.
"Very good," said her embarrassed mother.
"Is it because I'm blonde, mommy?"
"No Honey, it's because you're 19!"
BREAKING: Messi has just been substituted by a noob player, these are the words of the coach post-game! "Ah woops, wrong sub"
A man at a job interview A man walks into an office for a job interview.
The employer asks a few questions to the man,
He finishes and says he has 1 final question "what is your biggest flaw?" 
The man immediately replies 
"I'm unpredictable!"
The employer gulps and says "really?"

The man has an evil smirk and locks the door...

The man than says ...........

"Yeah"

Today I beat my addiction I'm addicted to my wife. 
Where did Ed's girlfriend go? Sheeran away
Whats the difference between a seatbelt and a condom? One of them prevents lives being **lost** in an accident and the other prevents lives being **made** in an accident.
NSFW Little johnny is playing in his brothers room when...        he hears a rap song his brother is playing. The rap song says "pimps and hoes", and little johnny asks his brother what that means. His brother in a panic says "it means ladies and gentlemen!" His brother decides to turn off the music, but before he could hit the button the song continues on to say "dicks and pussies" little Johnny again curious asks his older brother what this means, and his brother replies, "coats and hats!" 
         He kicks Johnny out of his room and Johnny passes his dad in the bathroom shaving. He goes in,   and right before he can tell his dad about what he had learned his dad cuts himself shaving and screams, "SHIT" and without hesitation little Johnny asks, "what does that mean?" His dad startled by him being there says "shaving cream Johnny. Now go find your mom!" And shuts the door.
        Johnny goes into the kitchen where his mom is stuffing a turkey for a family dinner they are having. During the process she gets her hand stuck in the turkey and screams, "FUCK!", little johnny again curious asks, "whats that mean?", she turns around embarrassed and said "stuffing Johnny!" Now go and play with your toys. 
      About half an hour goes by and little Johnnies grandparents come by! They ring the door bell and Johnny answers invitimg his grandparents in. As they walk in, little Johnny is more then proud to show off all of what he learned!! 
      "Welcome pimps and hoes, please put your dicks and pussies on the the coat rack!"
     His grandparents gasp at what he says and scream, "where are your parents!?!?" 
      To which he replies, "my dads in the bathroom shaving shit off his face, and my moms in the kitchen fucking a turkey!"
Yoda was scared of 7 because..... 6, 78.
TIFU by eating my friend's sandwich wrong sub
I asked my Mexican friend if he was upset about Trump's wall... He said, "Eh, I'll get over it."
Breaking: Spelling Bee Official Pronounced Dead. He then used it in a sentence. 
[NSFW] How many times in your life have you masturbated? Beats me
Did you hear? The toilet was stolen at my local police station. The cops have nothing to go on.
They say America runs on Dunkin... That's why I always risk my life crossing 3 busy lanes of traffic for my large iced, extra extra.  
Freddy the Flea Freddy The Flea

Freddy the Flea is laying out in the sun in Miami Beach, putting suntan lotion on his little flea arms, and on his little flea legs, when he notices his buddy Oscar stumbling down the beach.  

Oscar is a mess, he’s shivering, disheveled, and looks like 9 miles of bad road.
“Holy shit Oscar, what happened?” asks Freddy.  Oscar says, “You won’t believe it Freddy, I just rode all the way down from New York on some biker’s mustache, and I damned near froze my ass off”.

Freddy says, “Oscar, you dummy, that’s not the way to travel.  What you do is go to the airport, go in the ladies restroom, climb on a toilet seat, and when a nice stew from Miami Air sits down, you hop aboard, and fly first class”.

Oscar agrees to try this.  A couple weeks later, Freddy’s on the beach again, and here comes Oscar, looking even worse than before.  Freddy says, “Oscar, what happened, didn’t you do what I said?”

Oscar says, “Oh Freddy, I did just like you told me, I went in the women’s bathroom at the airport, and when a nice blonde stewardess sat down I jumped on.  It was so nice and warm and comfy that I just relaxed and fell asleep.  And the next thing I knew, I was on that same biker’s mustache!”.

z
Today Trump consulted his alter ego about lifting the ban.. Yep, Bannon.
NSFW-My wife asked me to spice things up in the bedroom Apparently pouring cayanne pepper up her snatch isn't what she had in mind.
What's the difference between a dead baby and a apple? I don't ejaculate on a Apple before I eat it.
Have you heard that joke about Helen Keller? Don't worry, she didn't, either.
My Joke My Joke:

Back in he Old West there were these 2 cowboys Mike and Larry. And one day they're talking and come to the conclusion 
that they're both sick of punching cows. They wander off, it's hard to rope them, they're BIG and dangerous, etc.

So they discuss what other animals they could herd and after much discussion Mike has the bright idea of herding chickens!

Yes, they are small, they stick together, and there's plenty of food for them to eat.

So they get a bunch of chickens and herd their flock all over the west.

One day, they enter Dodge City with their flock, but as they're going down main street, a bunch of cowboys start 
laughing at them and throwing eggs, etc.

So Mike says to Larry....I think we better get the flock out of Dodge..................z

What’s the difference between a gold-plated Ferrari and free-range chicken ranch? The chicken ranch has the cocks on the outside.
The pastor asked if anyone in the congregation would like to express praise for answered prayers. Suzie Smith stood and walked to the podium. She said, "I have a praise. Two months ago, my husband, Tom, had a terrible bicycle wreck and his scrotum was completely crushed. The pain was excruciating and the doctors didn't know if they could help him." You could hear a muffled gasp from the men in the congregation as they imagine the pain that poor Tom must have experienced. "Tom was unable to hold me or the children," she went on, "and every move caused him terrible pain." We prayed as the doctors performed a delicate operation, and it turned out they were able to piece together the crushed remnants of Tom's scrotum, and wrap wire around it to hold it in place."

Again, the men in the congregation cringed and squirmed uncomfortably as they imagined the horrible surgery performed on Tom.

"Now," she announced in a quivering voice, "thank the Lord, Tom is out of the hospital and the doctors say that with time, his scrotum should recover completely."

All the men sighed with unified relief. The pastor rose and tentatively asked if anyone else had something to say.

A man stood up and walked slowly to the podium. 
He said, "I'm Tom Smith." The entire congregation held its breath. 
"I just want to tell my wife the word is sternum."


I hate talking with Jewish people It really takes me out of Mein Kampfort zone!
Have you heard about the hobo gangster? Word on the street is he's roofless.
Who has killed more indians than John Wayne? Union Carbide Corporation
What do you call the front page political tooting on reddit? Trumpit
Age is just a number... wrong, its a word
Playing Pinball at an Arcade I was playing pinball while in an arcade, I guess I was doing good because a little kid was watching me.  My ball got stuck, and the kid saw, and shook the machine causing the game to think I was cheating.  I was so tilted.
"Hold my beer." -2017
Marylou.... A husband was sitting quietly reading his paper one morning, peacefully enjoying himself, when his wife sneaks up behind him and whacks him on the back of the head with a huge frying pan.

"What the heck was that for!" he asked.

She replies, "I found a piece of paper in your pants pocket with the name Marylou written on it..."

"Oh, dear, remember two weeks ago when I went to the horse races? Well, Marylou was the name of one of the horses I placed a bet on."

The explanation seems to appease her, and she leaves the room to go about her business.

Three days later, the man is again sitting in his chair reading the morning paper. His wife abruptly hangs up the telephone and then whacks him on the back of the head with the huge frying pan.

"What the heck did I do wrong this time!" he asked.

She answered, "Your horse just called!"
We, the American people have a great sense of humor. Have you seen our President?
Someone stole my mood ring, And I don't know how to feel about it. 
A fish went swimming. And it drowned.

*My 4 year old daughter has just told me her first "joke". She finds it hilarious. "You get it? Fish cant drown. Thats funny!" 
I'm worried..
What's the difference between a Taliban Outpost and a Pakistani School? I don't know, why don't you ask the 50 drone pilots on this sub?
What is a pirates favorite toy?? Aarrrh sea boats.
I like my women how I like my ice cream... Rich, thick, and occasionally headache-inducing.
Three devotees decide to prove the power of their faith... ...they all decide to jump off a cliff one by one, all the while invoking the name of their chosen deity.

The first devotee, a Buddhist, proceeds to stand at the edge of the cliff and begins reciting the mora sutta. At the end of the chant he jumps and calls on Buddha three times: ***"Buddha protect your servant, Buddha protect your servant, BUDDHA PROTECT YOUR SERVANT!"*** 

Lo and behold, just before he hits the ground he turns into a mighty eagle and swoops away and alights once again on the top of the cliff as a man.

The remaining devotees are amazed and agrees that Buddha is a worthy deity, but that their deities will not be bested.

The second devotee, a Roman Catholic, steps up to the cliff edge and stands quietly for a few moments. He then proceeds to jump and shouts: ***"Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I SHALL FEAR NO EVIL!"***

Halfway down the cliff face, a shaft of light envelops the Catholic and he is borne aloft on the arms of a host of angels and is safely deposited at the top of the cliff.


The other devotees are again amazed and agrees the Lord really is a deity worthy of all praise.


The third devotee, a Muslim, then proceeds to the edge of the cliff; he kneels down and begins his own prayers. He does so for several minutes and then stands up and turns and walks away from the edge. 


The Buddhist and the Catholic are confused and immediately question the Muslim's faith in Allah.


The Muslim just smiles and tells them, ***"Allah spoke to me and bade me tell you that you are both very much welcome and that he strongly counsels against such silly acts as jumping off a cliff."***
A young bear cub was roaming the jungle . An animal he had never seen before comes strolling out of the trees. He asks " excuse me what kind of animal are you?" 

The animal replys
" well,  I am a tiger" 

The bear acts suprised and says " are you sure?       You don't look like a tiger." 

The tiger says " Do you think I'm a lyin?"
What do you get when you cross professor trelawney with human rights issues? American sybill liberties union
Darling, I'm sorry but I just didn’t like it Little Johnny once bought his Grandma a very nice, luxurious toilet brush for her birthday. But when he went to visit her a couple of weeks later, it wasn't in the bathroom. 

Little Johnny asked his Grandma, “Gran, what happened to the toilet brush I gave you?”

“Darling, I'm sorry but I just didn’t like it. It was too scratchy. After all those years, I’ve gotten used to the toilet paper.”

Anybody see that movie about the dog who befriends a dolphin? A Dog's Porpoise
Can't find any batteries for my vibrator What a buzz kill!
Whats the difference between a blonde and a mosquito? A mosquito stops sucking when you slap it.
The sandwich walked into the bar The sandwich walked into the bar.  
It sat on the counter and asked for a banana.  
The waiter said, "Sorry Sir, we don't serve food here."
Have you heard about the new movie where Donald Trump becomes a bug? It's called "President Weevil"
How many members of a given ethnic group does it take to change a lightbulb? 
A finite number!  One to to change the bulb, the rest to act in a manner stereotypically derogatory to their ethnicity!
On Pokemon Go, I caught a rare Pepe the Frog. It unexpectedly evolved into Pee Pee the President... It learned Water Gun, Heal Block, and Can't Escape.
Why is a Cadillac like a Woman? Cause when it's cold in the morning and you need them the most....they won't turn over.........z
Have you heard the people who pronounce 'Pangea' with a hard 'g' instead of the soft one? For the confused, I'm talking about consonantal drift.
What's a ninja's favorite band? Five Finger Death Punch
An elderly woman felt like she and her husband were losing touch, so she convinced him to go to couple therapy with her. While sitting through the normal "how does that make you feel" questions, the therapist asks about their sex life. The woman speaks up first and mentions how he never wants to have sex anymore and it makes her feel upset. The man, who was already flustered, got embarrassed, and stormed out, refusing to return. 

Giving up and visibly upset, the woman finally got up from the couch and started for the door to meet her husband in the parking lot. The therapist stopped her and went for a bottle in his desk. "I shouldn't do this, but I want to make sure you're happy and your marriage is happy", he said as he handed here two blue pills, "Here, take these Viagras. At breakfast, crush one up and put it in his coffee. I can promise you, his sex drive will go up and all will be fine again!" 

The woman excitingly took the pills, thanked the therapist, and left.

The following week, she returned. "How did it go?" he asked. 

"Well, I did what you said. That morning, I crushed up his Viagra at the counter and sneaked it into his coffee." the woman replied.

"And?" urged the therapist.

"Well" she said, with a smile on her face, "he got this look in his eye, and grabbed me and we had some of the best sex in years!". Her smile then went to a blank stare. 

"So are things better now, then?" asked the therapist.

"Yes, I would say so." she replied. "But we can never go back to that McDonald's ever again"
Did you know using too many commas is now illegal.... You can end up with a very lengthy sentence.
You know that tingly sensation you get when you like somebody? That's common sense leaving your body. 

Edit: now I know what people mean when they say "RIP inbox". 
What did the moose say after leaving a gay bar??? Man, I cant believe i just blew 50 bucks in there
Who was Bill Cosby's favorite character in the 1991 film "Hook"? RUFIO! RUFIO! RU-FI-OOO!
I used to wear polarized glasses until I released they made me focus too far to the left or the right...
So the creator of Pac Man died today... I guess he's the ghost now. 
What do spinach and hard anal sex have in common? If you were forced to have it as a kid, you'll hate it as an adult.
If John Cena stars in a cooking show,what would it be called? Snackdown Live
What comes after 69? Mouthwash
A recently divorced supermodel puts out an ad for a new partner The ad states that there are three requirements: can't beat me, you can't run around on me, and must be good in bed. 20 minutes after she puts out the ad, she hears a ring on the doorbell. She opens the door and sees a man with no arms and no legs sitting in a wheelchair. She says "What are you here for?" he responds "you put out an ad in the newspaper, right?" she says "do you think you meet the requirements?" he pauses and says "I have no arms, so I can't beat you, and i have no legs, so I can't run around on you" she says "there's another requirement, are you good in bed?" he says "well how do you think I rang the doorbell?"
You're so fat That when you were born there was a birthquake.
I like my women how I like McAfee antivirus Disabled.
Why did the pie go to the dentist? 
It needed a filling.
A blonde, a brunette, and a redhead are stranded in a desert... A blonde, a brunette, and a redhead are stranded in a desert, when they come across a magical lamp, which the blonde then rubs repeatedly.

A genie then comes out of the magic lamp, and promises to grant one wish for each of the girls. 

The brunette says "I just want to go home!" she is then teleported back home, safe and sound.

The redhead says "I want to go back home!" she is also teleported back home. 

The blonde then says "I just wish my friends were here!"
I'm a man of strong convictions. The District Attorney in this town is pretty good.
Two scientists are studying a nest of newly-hatched crows.. The new parents are doing what they can, and the three chicks are noisy and demanding.

One day, the scientists notice that one of the chicks isn't making noise anymore. They see he's making the motions, but no sound is coming from his beak.

The scientists decide to do something to try to help, since they reason that crows use their voices for social interaction well as for warning others of potential harm. It's got his own good.

They take the baby crow from the nest, and run a series of tests, and scans. They administer medicines, and even try some other therapies that are less traditional, but for all they do, the baby crow still cannot make a sound.

Finally, they concede defeat, and had to admit to themselves that it was just a...

Lost caws...

Made this up today after I saw "lost cause" on a license plate.
I'm dating a palm tree. It's nothing serious though. Just fronds with benefits. 
A little marry poppins Mahatma Gandhi, as you know, walked barefoot most of the time, which produced an impressive set of calluses on his feet. He also ate very little, which made him rather frail and, with his odd diet, he suffered from bad breath. This made him a super calloused fragile mystic hexed by halitosis.
What's black and white and red all over? The slowest zebra on the prairie.
What to you call an Asian lady's private parts? A vachina.
There was a blackout in neighborhood last night... Police told us to wait until they shot him.
What does Kellyanne Conway eat for lunch? Alternative snacks
I heard Starbucks is trying to hire a lot more refugees Those poor art majors are going to suffer, then
A brother and sister are fucking in her room when their dad walks in... And says, "You slut, you're just like your mother!"
Yesterday a clown held the door open for me I thought it was a nice jester
When asking a basic white girl if she wants some Starbucks, the short answer will always be "yas" The long answer is probably going to be "yaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaas"
Nintendo Switch to PC.
Whats got 2 legs and bleeds? half a cow.
What should the real name for a colonoscopy be? A colonoscopoo. 
After the recent political events all my friends were like "we're going to rally" And I was like why are you going to North Carolina there's nothing to do there it's so boring.
Anyone ever try Canadian Bacon? I hear it's the nicest bacon around.
What's the difference between Harry Potter's best friend and his pot? Nothing, they're both cauldron.
I just read a funny joke about the movie Ground Hog Day... I just read a funny joke about the movie Ground Hog Day...
What do a lover and an electric guitar have in common? You'll get a lot of feedback if you're not fingering them correctly. 
How are morbidly obese people and child molesters alike? Both want to get into smaller pants.
What d'you get if you cross a mountain climber with a mosquito? You can't cross a scalar with a vector.
How do drug dealers get punished by Islamic-Extremist Terrorist in the Middle East? They get stoned.
A guy is having sex with a girl and it feels terrible It doesn't feel wet or smooth but more like rough and dry. He finally asks her what's going on down there and she says "Oh sorry about that, be right back." She goes into the bathroom for a minute and comes back out, they start having sex again. Now it's nice and wet, smooth, and feels great. The guy says "That feels great, what did you do?" She replies "I pulled the scabs."
The guy who used to bully me in middle school still takes my lunch money. On the other hand, he makes great Subway sandwiches.
I wanted to study Computer Science but then I stopped... Turns out its just a sudo science.
What's the difference between a oral and rectal thermometer? The taste 
What's the difference between someone who makes wooden furniture and someone who does paint jobs? One is a carpenter and one is a car painter
I got into a fight with my girlfriend the other day She was saying a bunch of generic stuff like 'I need to learn to let things go' and 'I always keep things bottled up inside' and 'I make her feel trapped.' I had to interrupt her pretty quickly and tell her "you can drop all the hints you want, I'm not letting you out of this basement".
At this point... AIDS is worried about testing positive for Trump.
How do spiders find significant others? They use a web-based dating service.
A man with intellectual difficulties is in a basement staring at the door. Downstairs at the door. 
What do you tell a German who wants to know the time? Nine.
Little Johnny: Mommy, what's a transsexual? Mom: I think you should ask Aunt Dave that question. 
I got in touch with my inner self today. Thats the last time I'm buying 1 ply toilet paper at the dollar store.

I have the body of a 20 year old model, But it  takes up too much room in my freezer.
I tried to cheer my mentally challenged friend up... ...but I guess I shouldn't have said "Don't let an extra chromosome get you down."
How is called the president of a packaging company? The Boxx
What's the difference between a normal shower and a golden shower? I don't drink everything that comes out of the spout of a normal shower.
Why was Peach mad at Mario? He forgot to delete his Bowser history. 
What do you call someone with a rubber toe? Roberto
[NSFW] what did the leper say to the prostitute? Keep the tip.
Whether you like it or not Whether you like it or not, he's the man in charge. And I have to say, so far I agree with almost every decision he has made. Some of those decisions have been very controversial, and I know a lot of people don't like him, but he has surrounded himself with some of the greatest minds and most talented people in the world. I'm confident that history will judge him as one of the best, if not the very best this country has ever seen. And there's absolutely no denying his amazing leadership qualities. I know not everyone is going to agree with me, but these are just a few of the reasons I love Bill Belichick.
How many women does it take to change a lightbulb? One
TIL that Fedex is soon to acquire rival company UPS. After the merger it will be called Fed-Up!
A girl realised that she had grown hair between her legs. She got worried and asked her mom about that hair.

Her mom calmly said, “That part where the hair has grown is called Monkey, be proud that your monkey has grown hair.” …. the girl smiled.

At dinner, she told her sister, “My monkey has grown hair.”

Her sister smiled and said, “That’s nothing, mine is already eating bananas.”
What do you call a particularly crabby Chinese grandma? A crust-asian. 

^(I'm sorry....)
What does a pimp use to water his plants? Hoes
What does a gay horse eat? Haaaaayyyy

What does a black horse eat?

Hay motherfucker!
Why did the duck go to rehab? (Different answer than normal) 

He wanted to quack down on his drug usage. 
So a priest walks into a bar... Looks at the ugly walls,  and says to the bartender:

"My son,  you must repaint". 
My girlfriend said she was "Bi". Little did I know she meant bipolar...
Why was the father of a transgender invisible? Because he was a transparent!
You look like Helen Brown. I look better in blue.
A man is stranded on a desert island, all alone for ten years. One day, he sees a speck in the horizon. He thinks to himself, "It's not a ship." The speck gets a little closer and he thinks, "It's not a boat." The speck gets even closer and he thinks, "It's not a raft." Then, out of the surf comes this gorgeous blonde woman, wearing a wet suit and scuba gear. She comes up to the guy and says, "How long has it been since you've had a cigarette?"

"Ten years!", he says.

She reaches over and unzips a waterproof pocket on her left sleeve and pulls out a pack of fresh cigarettes. 

He takes one, lights it, takes a long drag, and says, "Man, oh man! Is that good!" 

Then she asked, "How long has it been since you've had a drink of whiskey?" 

He replies, "Ten years!" 

She reaches over, unzips her waterproof pocket on her right sleeve, pulls out a flask and gives it to him. 

He takes a long swig and says, "Wow, that's fantastic!" 

Then she starts unzipping a longer zipper that runs down the front of her wet suit and she says to him, "And how long has it been since you've had some real fun?" 

And the man replies, "Wow! Don't tell me that you've got golf clubs in there!"
I JUST SAW A SEA COW CHANGING COLOR!! OH  THE HUE  MANATEE!!
Food is like dark humor Not everyone gets it. 
A bum comes up to the front door of a very expensive house and taps gently on the door When the rich owner answers, the bum asks him, "Please, sir, could you give me something to eat? I haven't had a good meal in several days." 

The owner says, "I have made a fortune in my lifetime by supplying goods for people. I've never given anything away for nothing. However, if you go around the back, you will see a gallon of paint and a clean paint brush. If you will paint my porch, I will give you a good meal." 

So the bum goes around back and a while later he again knocks on the door. The owner says, "Finished already? Good. Come on in. Sit down. The cook will bring your meal right in." 

The bum says, "Thank you very much. But there's something that I think you should know. It's not a porch you got there. It's a BMW." 
A guy walks into a bar... Ouch. 
Do you want to here a joke about the Jonestown Massacre? It has quite the Punch Line.

edit: *hear. I blame autocorrect.
Whats the differebce between an Afghani Military Base and a Pakistani Elementary School? I don't know, I just fly the drone.
How is light beer like having sex in a canoe on the river? Both are fucking close to water. 
Why can't a blonde dial 911? She can't find the 11.
What did Gordon Freeman experience when he turned 40? A Half Life crisis.
If you have to work tomorrow, call in sick. If your boss says "Well you don't sound sick." 
Say, "Well I'm fucking my sister; that sound sick enough for ya?"
There comes a time in a man's life when he has to choose: either stand up for what he believes, or stay down on his knees. On mass, that time comes about a hundred times, and the decision is always made out of peer pressure.
[Politics] Trump: 'The less immigrants we bring in the better' Pence: 'The fewer'

Trump: 'I told you not to call me that yet'
How many Poles need to cut tree? 96 and a plane.
what's the difference between a black man and a box of donuts one of them's already full of holes before the cops see them
What's the best computer for producing music? A Dell.
Why didn't the Cannibal eat the Politician? Because he was full of shit.
I was going through my wardrobe, trying to select a suit for my grandmother's funeral. I said, "What shall I wear?"

"I don't really care," said my mum. "As long as you don't you stick out."

It's not easy being a necrophiliac. 

Did you know that Trump is writing a book? It's called "My Struggle"
My son didn't want to study So I teached him a lesson
Who built King Arthur's round table? Sir Cumference
An airplane was about to crash with 4 passengers on board. An airplane was about to crash. There were 4 passengers on board, but only 3 parachutes. 

The 1st passenger said, "I am Russell Westbrook and I'm averaging a triple double. The Thunder and my millions of fans need me, and I can't afford to die." So he took the 1st pack and left the plane.

The 2nd passenger, Donald Trump, said, "I am the newly-elected US President, and I am the smartest President in American history, so my people don't want me to die." He took the 2nd pack and jumped out of the plane. 

The 3rd passenger, the Pope, said to the 4th passenger, a 10 year old schoolboy, "My son, I am old and don't have many years left, you have more years ahead so I will sacrifice my life and let you have the last parachute." 

The little boy said, "That's okay, Your Holiness, there's a parachute left for you. America's smartest President took my backpack."
It's always funny until someone gets hurt. Then it's hilarious.
Here's to virgins Thanks for fucking nothing. 
Someone gave a handjob to Albert Einstein... What a stroke of genius!
What do you call a black guy eating KFC? A bandwagonner.
Q: Why did God invent colour blindness? A: So someone will fancy the ginger kids. 
People always ask me what my wife does for a living, but it's just too hard for me to say. You see...

She sells sea shells by the sea shore.
What would the Greek gods have been like without their leader? Zeusless.
Trump Executive Order #16 Trump: From now on, 2+2 will equal 5.

Reuters: But that can't be right, 2+2=4. We proved that, too!

Trump: You can say 2+2=4, but this is alternative math.
I've got an annoying habit of quoting Elton John lyrics... ...I hope you don't mind.
Have you read Donald Trump's book, The Art of the Deal? It has four chapter 11s.
Quitting smoking is sooooo easy, I do it all the time.
My wife called me at work today. "Honey, do you want to come home at lunch for a quickie?"

"Sarah, it's pronounced Quiche."
Israeli, German, Russian, and American doctors were talking ... ‏An Israeli doctor says: "In Israel, medicine is so advanced that we cut off a man's liver put them on another man, and in 6 weeks, he is looking for work."

‏The German doctor says: "That's nothing,
‏in Germany we take part of a brain, put it in another man, and in 4 weeks he is looking for work."

‏The Russian doctor says: "Gentlemen, we take half a heart from a man, put it in another's chest, and in 2 weeks he is looking for work."

‏The American   doctor laughs: 
"You all are behind us. Two days ago, we took a man with no brains, no heart, and no liver and made him President...Now, the whole country is looking for work!"
A Blonde, Brunette, and Redhead all meet at the Stairway to Heaven... An angel at the top says, "I'm going to tell a joke to you all. If you do not laugh, you may advance one stair, but if you DO laugh, you'll fall off into Hell." 

The angel tells the 1st joke and the women do not laugh. They all advance. The angel tells the 2nd joke and the Redhead laughs, and she falls off the Stairway. 

On the 6th joke, the Brunette laughs and falls of the Stairway. 

After all 15 jokes, the Blonde makes it all the way up the stairs. The angel cheers, "Congratulations! You made it into Heaven!" 

The Blonde begins to laugh hysterically.

"Why are you laughing?" The angel asks. 

The Blonde responds while trying to pull herself together, "I just got the 1st joke...!"
What did Guinevere say to king Arthur after sex? "You Camelot".
Imagine there was a government agency called Planned Parenthood that euthanized old racists.
Women are turning into good drivers! So if you're a good driver, watch out for women turning!
A Buddhist asks a hot dog vendor to "Make me one with everything." The Buddhist gives him a fifty and the vendor just pockets it.  The Buddhist asks for change and the vendor replies, "Change comes from within."
My favorite english writer is Dickens JK Rowling
Armageddon Knocking Knock! Knock!

Who's there?

Armageddon

. . .

Hello?

Knock knock!

Um ... who's there?

Armageddon!!

. . . 

Hello?

Knock! Knock!

Um ... who's there?

ARMAGEDDON!

Um ... Armageddon who?

ARMAGEDDON tired out here! Open the GOD-DAMNED door!!
Many people say we are what we eat Yet the same people say that cannibals act like animals.
What is Donald Trump's favorite video game? *Papers, Please*
What's a Ghosts favorite porn? Boo-Kake
A hotel owner, radio host, and a banker walk into the situation room. Fuck. 
My girlfriend was sad that her dog died so I went out and got her an identical dog Then she said "what the hell am I going to do with two dead dogs?
Had a blood test the other day. I did really well, A+
Life found on Mars!! The rover Curiosity found what appears to be an early marsupial ancestor of the American possum. Unfortunately, the rover Opportunity ran over it the day before.
No matter how good are you doing something There's always an asian that can do it with eyes closed.



With love,
An auto-racist Asian
What is this new band everyone is talking about? Some muslim band is all over the news!
I'm torn: on the one hand, I absolutely hate xenophobia, sexism, and racism on the other hand, orange is my favorite color. 
What do you call a fat psychic? A four chin teller
A grape threw a huge outdoor party on a hot, sunny day... It was raisin' the roof.
Two prisoners wanted to escape prison... But there were a 100 fences between them and freedom, they decided to jump the fences. when they had jumped 99 fences one of them says "i'm tired, let's go back".
How do you know a rapper was raised by lesbians? "Yo I gotta give a shoutout to my moms."
I'm going to set up a Kickstarter for all the trump protestors... Not to donate to them, for them to donate to me. That way I can afford to take off work and do something as meaningful...like rocket league or GTA online   
Middle East theme song oh ohhhh... I'm an alien... I'm a legal alien... I am Iranian getting kicked out of New York... 
I asked my Biology professor if he had any patients. He didn't seem too thrilled with me after that...
I'm an auto mechanic... So I can safely say I don't understand the gay agenda.

But I do understand the Trans mission.
A father was reading a Bible story to his young children He said:
“The man named Lot was warned to take his wife and flee out of the city, but his wife looked back and was turned to salt.”
His son asked, “What happened to the flea?”
What would happen, if IT technic became a doctor? Patient: I can't bend my knee.

Doctor: [*bends his knee*] Weird, works fine for me.
What's mexican for fucked ? Deported
During a job interview, 
Tom was nailing the job interview, and then the interviewer said:
"Before I give you the job, I must make sure that you know what a Penguin is."
"What's a penguin?" asks Tom, only to be yelled at:
"YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT A PENGUIN IS?! GET OUT! AND NEVER COME BACK!"
Tom then comes back home with a sad look. His wife notices, and asks him:
"What happened?"
Tom replies:
I got denied the job because I didn't know what a penguin was."
Then out of nowhere she starts screaming:
"YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT A PENGUIN IS?! GET OUT OF MY HOUSE, AND I'M GOING TO SUE YOU!"
He goes to court the next day, and the judge asks him:
"What led you to being prosecuted?"
Tom replied:
"I got denied a job opportunity and got sued by my wife because I didn't know what a penguin was," only for the judge to yell:
"YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT A PENGUIN IS?! I'M GIVING YOU A LIFE SENTENCE!"
Then in a lonely cell, a guard asked him:
“How did you end up here, locked up forever?”
Tom replied, already losing his mind:
“I got denied a job opportunity, got sued by my wife and sentenced to jail because I didn’t know what a penguin was.”
Then the guard yells:
“YOU DON’T KNOW WHAT A PENGUIN IS?! YOU DON’T DESERVE TO LIVE,” and shoots him without hesitation.
He appears at the Pearly Gates, and is asked:
“How did you end up dead?”
He replies:
“I got denied a job opportunity, sued by my wife, sentenced to jail and then shot at by a guard, all because I didn’t know what a penguin was.”
He then gets yelled at.
“YOU DON’T KNOW WHAT A PENGUIN IS?! YOU’RE GOING TO HELL RIGHT AWAY!”
Then after entering hell, a demon asks him:
“How did you end up in hell?”
Tom replies:
“I got denied a job opportunity, sued by my wife, sentenced to jail, shot at by a guard, and then sent to hell, all because I didn’t know what a penguin was.”
The demon then starts yelling at him.
“YOU DON’T KNOW WHAT A PENGUIN IS?! I’LL SEND YOU TO THE WORST PLACE OF HELL!!”
He then arrives at the hottest, darkest and most torturing place of hell. He was all alone, except for another man, curled up in a corner. This other man notices Tom and asks him:
“How did you end up here with me?”
Tom, already really scared, fearing of something even worse, started saying:
“I got denied a job opportunity, sued by my wife, sentenced to jail, shot at by a guard, sent to hell, and then sent here, ALL BECAUSE I DIDN’T KNOW WHAT A PENGUIN WAS!”
The other man calmly says:
“same”


I finally convinced mom to watch anime to prove it's not childish and immature at all. But it's weird to watch hentai with your parents.
I finished eating lunch No joke just wanted to tell someone.
Where can I buy donkey hide as a gift? Ass skin for a friend
What's the difference between a Pakistani school and a terrorist camp? I don't fucking know I'm just a drone pilot
What do you call an elf that won't shut up? Gobby.
AN ODD TALE There was once a man named Odd. People made fun of him because of his name so he decided to keep his gravestone blank when he died.
Now when people pass by the burial site, they point and say, "That's odd."
When I was young I asked my mum what a couple was she said,"oh two or three." And she wonders why her marriage didn't work.
I walked into a bar... and I said to the Bartender:

*Bartender, may I please have a Rum and Coke?*  
The bartender replied:  
*I'm sorry, we only have Pepsi, is that okay?*  
I replied:  
*That's fine.*

So he poured me a Pepsi and Coke.
There was once a man who collected tractors... John had barns upon barns filled with all kinds of tractors. New ones, old ones, shiny ones, dull ones, broken ones, working ones, tractor parts, tractor wheels. If it was a tractor, he had one.  
  
After years of collecting tractors, he decided he was no longer interested. He tore his tractor calender off his tractor wallpaper, and smashed his tractor mug to the floor. The following day, John had sold all his tractors and tires, all his shiny ones and his dull ones, and even his old and new tractors too.  
  
He spent the money from selling all his tractors exploring the world. From Maimi to Cairo, London to Tokyo and every spot in between. After a year, John became bored of travelling, and decided he needed a refreshing pint.    
  
John returned to his local pub, and ordered a nice cool one. As he sipped at his frothy beverage, a group of men in the corner began to smoke. They were pumping noxious gas into the air like there was no tomorrow, and soon the room was thick with smog and people were choking on the harsh cloud.   
  
John stood up, and walked over to the window. He took a deep breath, and in one majestic puff, he had blew all the smoke out of the window.  
*"Oh my"*, said the landlord, *"How did you manage to do that?"*  
John smirked for a second before replying-  
 *"Easy. I'm an ex-tractor."*
I used to be addicted to the Hokey Pokey. But I turned myself around.
How many union construction workers does it take to change a lightbulb? Twelve. Two to drive the lightbulb across the state, one to supervise, two to hold "stop/slow" signs, one to make sure traffic cones are arranged alphabetically, one to actually change the lightbulb, and 5 to stand around with hands in their pockets. With union breaks every 30 minutes it should take no more than 2 weeks
What's the difference between American Women and Muslim Women? The American Women gets stoned before she has sex
Why were there so many protestors in CA this weekend? Because they were able to turn all that new water into whine.
Two muffins are in the oven. One muffin says to the other "It sure is hot in here". The other exclaims " AHHHH! A talking muffin!"
I've searched high and low for my brother's killer but nobody is willing to do it.
Menstruation jokes aren't funny. They're bloody hilarious!
My new bank is awesome. It's called condensation savings and loan. They give credit where credit is dew.
Edit: typo.
My wife and I made a deal that whoever woke up first on our anniversary, would have to wake the other with oral sex... I still don't know why she woke up screaming with my dick in her mouth.
Where does the Lone Ranger take his garbage? To the dump, to the dump, to the dump-dump-dump!
Why are women and children evacuated first in a disaster? So we can think about a solution in silence.
What's the difference between a thief and a comedian? At least thieves are known for stealing other people's shit.
called UPS in Germany today to ask when they were shipping my Oculus Rift they said "VR ready"
A 89 year old man visits his doctor "Hey Doc, I am really concerned. I am together with this beautiful 21 year old, and to satisfy her in bed I have to take my Viagra pills. You'd ought to think that I am no longer capable of breeding given my age, but somehow my girlfriend just got pregnant. How can that be?".

"Let me tell you a little story." the doctor said. 

"Once upon a time there was a hunter who was going out hunting. In a hurry he managed to grab his umbrella instead of his rifle. When he found his prey, a deer, he took the shot just as he realised he had brought his umbrella instead. Still, the deer fell and died. How could that be?" The doctor asked. 

"Well, it's obvious. Someone else took the shot!" The man explained. 

"My point exactly".

Edit: Formatting
According to the Chinese Zodiac it is the Year of the Cock. So it makes perfect sense that Donald Trump is president. 
So a man says to his friend... "I can use my penis as a weapon!"
"How?"
"Well we live in the UK so you are only allowed to have a blade that is less than 3 inches!"
(Note: I don't know if this is true or not, I just saw the blade fact somewhere and I remembered it.) 
Little Johnny: "Grandma, make a sound like a Frog." Grandma: "Why?" Little Johnny: "Cause daddy says we'll make a lot of money when you croak."
I'm about to eat lunch. No joke just wanted to tell someone.
Why don't black people go on cruises? They're not falling for that one again!
A married couple was watching volleyball game at a beach when the wife spotted a couple in the bleachers. They were being very affectionate. The girl was running her hands all over the boyfriend and nibbling on his ear. He had his hands on her chest. 

Looking at them, the wife said to her husband "I don't know whether to watch them or the game." 

Husband said, "Better watch them! You already know how to play volleyball." 
My wife's ass smells like sardines and old milk. I'm not joking.
Women are like grapes. Some age like fine wine. 
Some age like raisins.
A government employee sat in his office A government employee sat in his office, and out of boredom, decided to see what was inside his old filing cabinet. He poked through the contents and came across an old brass lamp. "This will look good on my mantel," he said, and took it home with him. 

While polishing the lamp, a genie appeared and, as usual, granted him three wishes. 

"I would like an ice-cold Coke right now." He gets his Coke and drinks it. Now that he can think more clearly, he states his second wish. "I wish to be on an island with beautiful women, who find me irresistible." 

Suddenly, he's on an island with gorgeous women eyeing him lustfully. He tells the genie his third and last wish. "I wish I'd never have to work again." Instantly, he was back in his government office. 
I did some shrugs in the gym. After someone asked me, "What are you doing here?"
John went to visit his 90 year old grandfather in a very secluded, rural area of Georgia. After spending a great evening chatting the night away, John's grandfather prepared breakfast of bacon, eggs and toast. However, John noticed a film like substance on his plate, and questioned his grandfather asking, "Are these plates clean?" 

His grandfather replied, "They're as clean as cold water can get them. Just you go ahead and finish your meal, Sonny!" 

For lunch the old man made hamburgers. Again, John was concerned about the plates as his appeared to have tiny specks around the edge that looked like dried egg and asked, "Are you sure these plates are clean?" 

Without looking up the old man said, "I told you before, Sonny, those dishes are as clean as cold water can get them. Now don't you fret, I don't want to hear another word about it!" 

Later that afternoon, John was on his way to a nearby town and as he was leaving, his grandfather's dog started to growl, and wouldn't let him pass. John yelled and said, "Grandfather, your dog won't let me get to my car". 

Without diverting his attention from the football game he was watching on TV, the old man shouted ... "COLDWATER, GO LAY DOWN!!!!" 
How does the karate kid train with his girlfriend? Wax on, fap off.
A man walked into a cafe, went to the bar and ordered a beer. "Certainly, Sir , that'll be one cent." 

One Cent?" the man exclaimed. 

He glanced at the menu and asked: "How much for a nice juicy steak and a bottle of wine?" 

"A nickel," the barman replied. 

"A nickel?" exclaimed the man. 

"Where's the guy who owns this place?" 

The bartender replied: "Upstairs, with my wife." 

The man asked: "What's he doing upstairs with your wife?" 

The bartender replied: "The same thing I'm doing to his business down here." 
A busload of politicians were driving down a country road A busload of politicians were driving down a country road, when suddenly the bus ran off the road and crashed into an old farmer's barn. 

The old farmer got off his tractor and went to investigate. Soon he dug a hole and buried the politicians. A few days later, the local sheriff came out, saw the crashed bus and asked the old farmer where all the politicians had gone. 

The old farmer told him he had buried them. 

The sheriff asked the old farmer, "Lordy, were they ALL dead?" 

The old farmer said, "Well, some of them said they weren't, but you know how them crooked politicians lie." 
A muslim walks into US Just kidding
A teacher asks her class... "Can anyone tell me the name of Robin Hood's girlfriend?"

Little Paddy raises his hand and says "Yes Miss, it's Trudy Glenn"

"No Paddy, the answer is Maid Marion"

"But Miss, what about the song? "Robin Hood, Robin Hood, riding Trudy Glenn!""
A cowboy walks into a bar A cowboy, who just moved to Wyoming from Texas , walks into a bar and orders three mugs of Bud. He sits in the back of the room, drinking a sip out of each one in turn. When he finishes them, he comes back to the bar and orders three more. 

The bartender approaches and tells the cowboy, "You know, a mug goes flat after I draw it. It would taste better if you bought one at a time." 

The cowboy replies, "Well, you see, I have two brothers. One is in Arizona , the other is in Colorado . When we all left our home in Texas , we promised that we'd drink this way to remember the days when we drank together. So I'm drinking one beer for each of my brothers and one for myself." 

The bartender admits that this is a nice custom, and leaves it there. 

The cowboy becomes a regular in the bar, and always drinks the same way. He orders three mugs and drinks them in turn. 

One day, he comes in and only orders two mugs. All the regulars take notice and fall silent. When he comes back to the bar for the second round, the bartender says, "I don't want to intrude on your grief, but I wanted to offer my condolences on your loss." 

The cowboy looks quite puzzled for a moment, then a light dawns in his eyes and he laughs. 

"Oh, no, everybody's just fine," he explains, "It's just that my wife and I joined the Baptist Church and I had to quit drinking. Hasn't affected my brothers though." 
I would be most grateful for any advice anyone could give me on this matter of deep concern to me. For sometime now I've suspected that my girlfriend may be having an affair. You know the sort of thing. Her mobile rings, I answer, someone hangs up. Recently she has started going out 'with the girls' a lot and when I ask which girls it's always "Just some friends from work, you don't know them". I always used to keep an eye out for her taxi coming home but now she always walks up to the house although I can hear a car setting off as if she has just got out of one around the corner. The other day I picked up her mobile, just to see what time it was, and she went mental, screaming at me that I should never touch her phone again and why was I checking up on her.

Anyway, I have never approached the subject with her. I kind of think deep down I don't really want to know the truth. But then last night she went out again and I decided that I would check up on her. I hid behind my car which I knew would give me a good view of the whole street so I could see which car she got out of on her return. It was whilst crouched behind my car that I noticed rust around my rear wheel arch.

Should I take it into a body repair shop or should I buy some stuff from Halfords and try to repair it myself?
If God called your cell phone, would you answer? Yes, but only to ask why my dick is so small.... 

Why God Whyyyyyyyyy why do I have such a small dick!? 
I could never go to acting school... There's way too much drama. 
Life is like a box of chocolates... ...You're probably not going to finish it all if you're diabetic.
An Italian man is on trial for killing his wife... An Italian man is on trial for killing his wife and is claiming temporary insanity as a defense. He is on the stand and is asked to describe the crime in his own words.

"Your Honor, I am a quiet, peaceful man who never bothers anyone. For the last twenty years, I get up at eight every morning, have breakfast at eight thirty, arrive at work at nine, leave work at five thirty, find dinner on the table, and spend the rest of the evening relaxing. Every day, awake at eight, breakfast at eight thirty, work at nine, home at five thirty, dinner on the table at six. Until the day in question -" and he pauses here, noticeably upset.

The lawyer asks him to continue. 

He takes a deep breath and starts again: "On the day in question, I woke at eight, had breakfast at eight thirty, was at work at nine, finished at five thirty. But when I came home there was no dinner on the table and no sign of my wife. I went up to the bedroom and found her in bed with a strange man. So I killed her."

The lawyer asks: "And what were your emotions at that time?"

"I was furious. Enraged. Frenzied even. Completely unable to control what happened. Gentlemen of the jury, when I come home at six o'clock, supper HAS to be on the table"
what is the stupidest animal in the jungle? 
The Polar Bear...
What do you get when you cross an elephant and a rhinoceros? Hell if I know.

Edit: 'Elephino.
What's Batman's favourite Pokémon? Cubone, because they both don't have parents :(
My wife was wondering if we should wash dishes by hand, in order to save a little money. I figure that using the dishwasher uses more electricity, but less water. So overall it's a wash.
Why did the Triceratops die out? Because they couldn't find any Tricerabottoms. 
A gorilla dies of old age in a zoo Being the only gorilla in the zoo, the zoo officials couldn't afford to lose the only attraction keeping their failing zoo business afloat. 

So they immediately decided to hire one of the zookeepers for an extra $100/day to wear the gorilla costume they have in storage and pretend to be the gorilla until they can afford a new one. 

For weeks, the zookeeper did lots of tricks in his gorilla suit to the astonishment of thousands of spectators watching the "human-like" gorilla.

About a month in, the popularity started to wane. So to get the attention of the crowd once again, he climbed over his enclosure and swung himself from the net ceiling over the lions den beside his enclosure. A large crowd gathered as they watched in terror and suspense. Suddenly, the zookeeper lost his grip and fell straight down on the floor of the lions den. He started crying for help when suddenly a lion pounced him from behind and whispered in his ear, "Shut the fuck up! You're gonna get us both fired."
I went to a job interview the other day... I went to a job interview the other day. The interviewer asked the question ''what are your strengths?'', to which I replied, honestly all I'm good at is telling jokes and fucking kids. 

Safe to say I got the job as a BBC TV presenter.
As Dumbledore stood there stroking his wand Harry regretted transferring to Catholic School
What's the difference between a pizza and a hoe? You don't pick the crust off a pizza before you eat it
Becoming a vegetarian... Is a huge missed steak.
Before my Girlfriend moved in I had one night stand... Things are getting pretty serious, we now have two night stands.
Why do feminists hate the postal service? Because they deliver straight white mail. 
There are 10 types of people in this world The ones who understands binary and the ones who don't.
A stoned bird A stoned bird was flying when it hit a moving car. The driver stopped, found the bird and took it home to treat it. When the bird is awake in his new cage, he looked around and thought: the jail?!! Did the driver die?
What school did Darth Vader attend? Univer-sith-y

... I'll let myself out. 
If history has taught us anything, then it the fact that human beings cant take care of the world and its all down to shit. So let's try a monkey to govern us all - every Trumpling 
My wife messed with my charging cable... I was shocked. 
What did one hat say to the other? You stay here, I'm going on ahead.
Ocean's 8 is expected to come out in late 2017  but probably won't be ready until at least 30 minutes after that
What do you call your Japanese wife? A rice cooker.
What is the difference between M&Ms and America? M&M got rid of the tan ones years ago
If the green man lives in the green house, the red man lives in the red house and the blue man lives in the blue house. Who lives in the white house? The orange man 
How did the Chinese Vicar introduce herself? By singing "I'm Asian Grace."
How do you elope? You can't.
Why was Hadrian so popular? Because he built a huge wall to keep the invaders out.
Have you heard about those new corduroy pillows? They are making headlines. 
What would you call it if Natalie Portman starred in Lorenzo's Oil? Lack Schwann
I was a smoker for 10 years until I decided to quit cold turkey I never thought to heat it up.
My dad told me about the birds and the bees today... Then he gave me a broom and told me to clear them out of the attic.
What did one earthquake say to the other? Was that your fault or mine?
Every cheese joke I know What did the cheese say when he looked in the mirror?
Halloumi 

What cheese do you use to coax a bear out of a cave?
Camembert

What type of cheese is made backwards?
Edam 

Which cheese doesn't belong to you?
Nacho cheese

Did you hear about the explosion at the cheese factory?
All that was left was de-brie 

Why did the cheese monger fall over?
He only had one Stilton

How does the cheese monger cut the cheese?
Caerphilly. 

 What type of cheese can you use to hide a horse?
Mascapone 
Snow Day! I get to stay home owl day. It's gonna be a hoot. 
I left my Adderall in my Ford Fiesta Now it's a Ford Focus
As a terrorist what would Willy Wonka scream before he carried out an attack? Nougat Chocolatebar!
I never tell lawyer jokes Lawyers don't think they're funny, and no one else thinks they're jokes.

Credit where credit is due: I just watched a video of Kellyanne Conway doing stand-up in 1990. This is one of hers.

edit: She might have got it from somewhere else of course, and this is just where I first heard it.
Why did the scarecrow win an award? He was outstanding in his field 😂
What is Trumps favorite movie? Minority Report!
Donald Trump always has his partner be on top during sex. Because he can only fuck up.
Our son was a by-product of a raunchy night in the back of a car. With one very open-minded taxi driver. 
I went to the local store and I asked... "How much for a dead battery?" I asked. 
He responded, to my delight. 
No charge.
Some newspapers and celebs have compared Trump to Hitler... Nazi's are outraged.
What does a stripper do with her asshole everyday before work? Drops him off at band practice
Teacher asks students to use incompletely in a sentence A teacher asked the students to use incompletely in a sentence.  One student raises her hand and says " my homework is incomplete".  The teacher says " close but I said to use incompletely".  Little johnny raises his hand but knowing little johnnys tendencies the teacher was afraid to call on him.  Nobody else raised their hand so the teacher calls on johnny.  Little johnny replies " when my balls hit her asshole I know I'm in completely."  

Appalled by the answer she sends johnny to the principal.  She then asks to use the word handsome in a sentence.  Little Susie raises her hand and the teacher calls on her.  Susie says " when I blow johnny my mouth gets sore so I have to use my hand some."


My girlfriend was unhappy that I referred to her as sloppy seconds but she was even more unhappy with Lady Leftovers
Little April was not the best student in..... Little April was not the best student in Sunday school.
Usually she slept through the class.
One day the teacher called on her while she was napping, "Tell me, April, who created the universe?"
When April didn't stir, little Johnny, a boy seated in the chair behind her, took a pin and jabbed her in the rear. 
"GOD ALMIGHTY!" shouted April and the teacher said, "Very good" and April fell back asleep.
A while later the teacher asked April, "Who is our Lord and Saviour," But, April didn't even stir from her slumber.
Once again, Johnny came to the rescue and stuck her again. 
"JESUS CHRIST!" shouted April and the teacher said, "very good," and April fell back to sleep.
Then the teacher asked April a third question. 
"What did Eve say to Adam after she had her twenty-third child?" 
And again, Johnny jabbed her with the pin. 
This time April jumped up and shouted, "IF YOU STICK THAT F*****G THING IN ME ONE MORE TIME, I'LL BREAK IT IN HALF AND STICK IT UP YOUR ARSE!"
The Teacher fainted.
How I learned to mind my own business: I was walking past the mental hospital the other day, and all the patients were shouting, "13....13.....13."

The fence was too high to see over, but I saw a little gap in the planks, so I looked through to see what was going on. 

Some idiot poked me in the eye with a stick, then they all started shouting, "14....14...14."
What did the seal go to school for? Art art art!
What kind of bagel can fly? A plain bagel.
Most people have a family tree, but I have a family cactus. Because mine is full of pricks. 
How to fix America? Unplug the power cord wait 10 seconds, plug it back again. See if it works.
Have you heard about the new aftershave that drives women crazy? No! Tell me about it.
It smells of $50 dollar bills
How do you know when you're at a gay picnic? NSFW All the hotdogs taste like shit


I once dated a biologist. I don't like to brag, but I always provided her with multiple organisms to keep her happy.
Capitalism has many problems but communism only has 3 - Breakfast
- Lunch
- Dinner
Facebook, I am not a social media person. Facebook: But-

Me: FACEBOOK, I AM NOT A SOCIAL MEDIA PERSON. YOU ARE REFUSING TO HELP. GOODBYE.

*Deletes Facebook, hits the gym, lawyers up, checks himself into psych ward*
Birds for sale... All of them are going cheap!
Why Didn't Gandhi's Broken Arm Repair? Because he fought the Caste system
A Russian, Trump and a Mexican are captured by an Amazonian tribe They are condemned to 50 hits with a stick.
The Russian goes first. 

After the Russian gets all 50 of his hits it's Trump's turn. Feeling bad they give him 1 request. Trump asks them to halve his beating. 

After Trump was done they felt really bad for the Mexican. They gave him 2 requests. The Mexican asks them to triple his beating. Astonished, the tribe asks what is the second request.

Mexican: Put Trump on my back 

Why did the can crusher quit his job? Because it was soda pressing. 
"Give it to me! Give it to me! I'm so wet!" She screamed. "No," I replied, "it's my umbrella."
The little red man There was once a little red man
Who walked down the little red road
Towards his little red house
When he got there, he opened up his little red gate
Walked up the little red pathway
Up to his little red door,
He opened said little red door 
And put his little red keys on the side
And walked up the little red stairs
To get into the little red shower

5 little red minutes past 
And the little red door bell rang,
So out the little red shower he climbed 
He grabbed a little red towel
And walked down the little red stairs towards the little red door
He opened the little red door 
And standing there was a huge big Green woman,
He was so shocked he dropped his little red towel and his little red was left dangling.
The big Green woman disgusted with him, she ran out of his little red front garden and straight over the little red road and got ran over.

What's the moral of the story?

Don't cross the road when the red man is flashing. 
Scientists have finally ruled out cats from any upcoming Mars missions cuz curiosity!
For sale: Second hand toilet paper.
Double Negatives ...are no-nos.
A bus full of Nuns falls of a cliff and..... A bus full of Nuns falls of a cliff and they all die.
They arrive at the gates of heaven and meet St. Peter. St. Peter says to them
"Sisters, welcome to Heaven. In a moment I will let you all though the pearly gates, 
but before I may do that, I must ask each of you a single question. Please form a 
single-file line." And they do so.
St. Peter turns to the first Nun in the line and asks her "Sister, have you ever touched a penis?"
The Sister Responds "Well... there was this one time... that I kinda sorta... touched one with the
tip of my pinky finger..."
St. Peter says "Alright Sister, now dip the tip of your pinky finger in the Holy Water, and you may 
be admitted." and she did so.
St. Peter now turns to the second nun and says "Sister, have you ever touched a penis?" 
"Well.... There was this one time... that I held one for a moment..."
"Alright Sister, now just wash your hands in the Holy Water, and you may be admitted" and she does so.
Now at this, there is a noise, a jostling in the line. It seems that one nun is trying to cut in front
 of another! St. Peter sees this and asks the Nun "Sister Susan, what is this? There is no rush!"
Sister Susan responds "Well if I'm going to have to gargle this stuff, I'd rather do it before 
Sister Mary sticks her ass in it!"

What do you call the strongest day of the year? The Summer Swollstice
What do you call a dildo traveling through space at the speed of light? Genital warps.
Right by the beach... [nsfw] [long] So I'm at the beach with my buddy, on Vancouver Island. We're just sitting on the rocks smoking some joints, meanwhile down on the sand there's girls in bikinis laying on their towels getting some sun.  We see this guy walking along the beach talking to the girls.  

He's wearing a big colorful Jamaican rasta hat and has this huge ridiculous red feather in his left hand.  As he approaches each of the girls on the beach he says something to them.  The girls either shake their head no and he moves along to the next girl or they stand right up, go into the bushes with him, and then come back in a few minutes and resume sunbathing.

Eventually he gets close enough that we can hear the conversation. He strolls up to a group of three girls. He says to the first girl "Hey... me tickle your clit with me feather?" and the girl, a little taken aback, says  "I'm sorry what did you say?" the guy says  "Typical Island weather!"  and the girl just kind of smiles at him awkwardly. 

He walks up to the second girl and says "Hey! Me tickle your clit with me feather?" now this girl is just aghast and disgustedly says "What the fuck did you just say to me?" and the guy smiles and says "Typical Island weather!" The girl thinks about that for a second and says "Oh yeah I suppose so..." 

Then he walks up to the third girl and says "Hey, me tickle your clit with me feather?" the girl squints her eyes at him for a moment then laughs, smiles, says "Yeah sure!"

They go off into the bushes for a few minutes when they come out the girl goes and sits back down on her towel satisfied and the guy keeps walking down the beach. Then this other guy walks up to him. Big fucking Australian guy.

He says "Oi mate! I seen what just happened there... tell me your secret!" 

So the guy with the feather says "First, simply say your line on the ladies. Then, if she doesn't like it just make a comment about the weather!"

The Australian guy says "Alright alright.." and walks over to a girl laying in the sand.

He says "Oi! I want to fuck you SO HARD!" 

The girl is shocked and says "Excuse me?! What the fuck?!" and the Australian guy grins and says "LOOKS LIKE RAIN!"
I've attended anger management classes before... ... it was soon after my dads first Alcoholics Anonymous group. "Dad," I said, "there are a lot of angry people." 
My dad replied, "There are a lot of angry drunks, too!" 
What kind of photo doesn't dissolve in water? A non-Polaroid. 
Do you know what a girl says when she gets a big dick inside her? no ?

neither do I.
Doctor : How is your headache? Man : She is fine. 
Women = Time x Money Now it's been previously proven that: **Women = Time x Money**

And we all know that: **Time = Money**

Which means we can infer that: **Women = Money x Money**

And from our prior research we've identified that "*Money is the root of all evil*, i.e. we can infer: **Money = SQRT(EVIL)**

So applying that to our previous results: **Women = SQRT(EVIL) x SQRT(EVIL)**

Which can be reduced to: **Women = EVIL**
Why don't people like communists? Because they have no class
Why was the blondes belly button all red and bruised? Because her BF was a blonde too. 
A man was driving along the coast of California on his motorcycle, just enjoying the scenery around him. After a long period of cruising and reflecting, the sky opened up, and God Almighty descended to meet him. 

"You have been a most faithful follower, my son. You have lived a good life, and for that I would like to grant you any wish." The man looked at God and pondered for a few moments before replying. 

"I wish for you to build a driving bridge from California across the ocean, so that all may better appreciate the beauty of your dominion." God shook his head and looked down upon the man. 

"Do you not think this is too material of a wish? You could wish for something that betters all of mankind, you could end hunger or war. I will give you one more chance to pick." The man, ashamed of his material choice, took his time before replying with his true wish. 

"God, I wish that men would be able to unravel and understand all of the mysteries of women, so that we may better communicate and get a long."
God looked intently at the man before replying. 

"One lane or two?“
Our local brothel just went out of business... all they left us was a sign in the window... Said "Beat it... we're closed"
I hate restaurants that have quirky and confusing ways of displaying men and woman bathroom signs. I mean, what am I?!? Am I a kitchen or an exit?
What's the difference between Donald Trump and Donald Duck? There is a human being inside of Donald Duck.
I called my son "a bloody disappointment to this family", and my wife burst into tears Apparently I shouldn't joke about miscarriage.
My wife accused me of ruining her birthday, but that's impossible I didn't even know it was her birthday!
Two fish swim into a concrete wall. One turns to the other and says "Dam!"
Where do lesbians like to camp? In a femi-nest.
I didn't understand why Obama had to give speeches behind bulletproof glass, I mean he's black and all but I doubt he would have shot anyone.
What does a rich Iraqi say at a bar mitzvah? Mosul Toff! 
What is the worst Israeli senior citizens resort? Jewrassic Park
What's a four letter word pertaining to females ending in -unt? Aunt!
Motherly Pride Two mothers were talking about their sons. The first said, "My son is such a saint. He works hard, doesn't smoke, and he hasn't so much as looked at a woman in over two years."

The other woman said, "Well, my son is a saint himself. Not only has he not looked at a woman in over three years, but he hasn't touched a drop of liquor in all that time."

"My word," the first mother said. "You must be so proud."

"I am," the second mother replied. "And when he's paroled next month, I'm going to throw him a big party."
A 16 year old blonde is dinning with her parents Blonde: Oh by the way I´m pregnant

Parents (simultaneously): You´re WHAT!?!

Blonde: Geez relax and eat a chill pill, I´m not even sure it´s mine  
One chemist tells his colleague: "Dude, I created a superconductive alloy out of Potassium, Nobelium and Tungsten!! I'm going to make millions off of it!"

The other chemist, jealous, says with a sigh,"Yes, I KNoW."
An Elephant Never Forgets In 1986, Peter Davies was on holiday in Kenya after graduating from Northwestern University .

On a hike through the bush, he came across a young bull elephant standing with one leg raised in the air. The elephant seemed distressed, so Peter approached it very carefully. He got down on one knee, inspected the elephants foot and found a large piece of wood deeply embedded in it. As carefully and as gently as he could, Peter worked the wood out with his knife, after which the elephant gingerly put down its foot.

The elephant turned to face the man and with a rather curious look on its face, stared at him for several tense moments. Peter stood frozen, thinking of nothing else but being trampled. Eventually the elephant trumpeted loudly, turned and walked away. Peter never forgot that elephant or the events of that day.

Twenty years later, Peter was walking through the Chicago Zoo with his teenaged son. As they approached the elephant enclosure, one of the creatures turned and walked over to near where Peter and his son Cameron were standing. The large bull elephant stared at Peter, lifted its front foot off the ground, then put it down. The elephant did that several times then trumpeted loudly, all the while staring at the man.

Remembering the encounter in 1986, Peter could not help wondering if this was the same elephant. Peter summoned up his courage, climbed over the railing, and made his way into the enclosure. He walked right up to the elephant and stared back in wonder. The elephant trumpeted again, wrapped its trunk around one of Peter's legs and slammed him against the railing, killing him instantly.

I guess it wasn't the same elephant.
What's the fastest thing on land? Stevie Wonder's speedboat
A father was sitting at the table with his two daughters Petal and Fridge.

Petal said, "Dad, why is my name Petal?"

Her dad answered, "Because a flower petal was the first thing to fall on you when you were born."

Then Fridge said, "HUURRGRRUWAHGUWAAAAAH!"
My pencil isn’t prone to making Freudian Slips but my penis
A wife hangs up after about a half-hour on the phone A wife hangs up after about a half-hour on the phone. The husband is surprised, "Wow, that was quick - usually you girls are at it for two hours at least!" "Yeah, well, it was a wrong number."
Big explosion at the cheese factory earlier.... There was de brie everywhere.
There's a new Indian open on a boat on the canal round corner from my house... ...It's called the Onion Barge.
My grandpa has the heart of a lion... And a lifetime ban from the local zoo 
My grandma and I were face timing with a bad connection So she says, "hold on, let me open the door to let some WiFi's in."


True stories can be jokes too..
There is a movie about premature ejaculation Coming Soon, now in theaters.

EDIT: Just let me try again changing a couple of words

EDIT 2: I swear this is the first time that this has happened

What do Donald Trump and Gordon Ramsay have in common? They both have a cabinet full of potatoes. 
I think my wife has a blind fetish... Last night she said she doesn't think we should see each other anymore.


What's it called when you cut off Leonardo DiCaprio's head DiCapritation
I like military puns Generally, they're very funny.
A blind man walks into a bar... And a table... then a chair... 
Most women would love to wake up on their birthday to the smell of fresh coffee, a nice breakfast, flowers and oral But not my Sister.
Someone stole my mood ring... I'm not sure how I feel about that....
Many people say a diploma is just a piece of paper. I as an educated person beg to differ It's a piece of cardboard.
To some people, the words "Do Not Touch" leave them terrified Especially when it's written in Braille. 
I hate those cocky Russian Nesting dolls They are always full of themselves 
Volkswagon were pretty dumb to name one of their cars 'Golf' Why name a car after a slow and boring sport where the hardest part is driving
Did you hear the one about the lovelorn college professor? He always put the course before the heart.
A video of a groundbreaking bowler goes viral He still had to pay to fix the bowling lane though
At the disco: 

"So whats a cute girl like you doing all by herself?"

"I had to fart"
Why did Matt get a Ticket? He's a speed Damon.
And the Lord said onto John... "Come forth and you shall receive eternal life" But John came fifth, and got a toaster... 
Two fish swim into a concrete wall One turns to the other and  says, "Dam!"
Two muffins are standing in an oven Two muffins are standing in an oven,

One turns to the other and says; "Boy, sure is hot in here."

To which the other one replies; "OH MY GOD! A TALKING MUFFIN!"
Reddit is a really green community, ...considering all the recycled content on here.
What do you call a Mexican Midget?  A paragraph because he's too short to be an ese﻿
What do you call beautiful people in india ? Tourist
Roses are red, violets are blue. When it comes to flower colours, the person who made this has no clue.
A black guy wakes up from a coma He asks what happened. The nurse says "You blacked out"
A man named Eric Cole... ... discovered that there was a direct correlation between the amount of mayonnaise on his cabbage salad and how good it tastes.
He's calling this correlation Cole's Law.
The girl i am dating, slapped me and told me to fuck off. Told her she was a gold-digger.. Apparently, that's not a good way to call someone who work in mines, digging gold.
Go Karting with a Muslim coworker Muslim coworker: We should organise a go karting day out, I went on the weekend and it was really fun!

Dan: That's a good but isn't it dangerous?

Jack: As long as you don't go in Ram-a-dan.
Donald Trump is our first POSOTUS Peice
Of
Shit
Of
The
United
States.
Recently a new casino opened in Tokyo (Japan)... It is called "Pokermon Go"
A man with 2 extra testicles removed them himself with a knife without anaesthesia Doing that takes some balls
An Irish cop and an English lawyer London lawyer runs a stop sign and gets pulled over by an Irish cop. He thinks that he is smarter than the cop because he is a lawyer from LONDON and is certain that he has a better education then any Irish cop. He decides to prove this to himself and have some fun at the Irish cop's expense! 
  
Irish cop says, "License and registration, please." 
  
London Lawyer says, "What for?" 
  
Irish cop says, "Ye didnae come to a complete stop at the stop sign." 
  
London Lawyer says, "I slowed down, and no one was coming." 
  
Irish cop says, "Ye still didnae come to a complete stop.  License and registration, please" 
  
London Lawyer says, "What's the difference?" 
  
Irish cop says, "The difference is, ye huvte come to complete stop, that's the law.  License and registration, please!" 
  
London Lawyer says, "If you can show me the legal difference between slow down and stop, I'll give you my license and registration and you give me the ticket. 
  
If not, you let me go and don't give me the ticket." 
  
Irish cop says, "Sounds fair.  Exit your vehicle, sir." 
  
The London Lawyer exits his vehicle. 
  
The Irish cop takes out his baton and starts beating the living crap out of the lawyer and says, "Daeye want me to stop or just slow down? "
How can you tell if a hamburger was grilled in space? 
It's a little meteor.
Expensive perfume 
A young and beautiful woman gets into the elevator, smelling like expensive perfume. 
    She turns to the old Italian woman on the elevator with her and says arrogantly, "Giorgio - Beverly Hills, $100 an ounce!" 
    Another young and beautiful woman gets on the elevator and also smells of very expensive perfume. She arrogantly turns to the old Italian woman and says, "Chanel No. 5, $150 an ounce!" 
    About three floors later, the old Italian woman has reached her destination and is about to get off the elevator. Before she leaves, looks both beautiful women in the eye, turns, bends over, and farts. "Broccoli - 49 cents a pound."
A priest was walking, slowly, out of a church in London A priest was walking, slowly, out of a church in London when a gust of wind blew his hat off and down the street. He was an old man, who walked with the aid of a cane, and who wasn't able to fetch his hat. Across the street, a young man saw what was happening, rushed over and grabbed the hat. He then returned it to the priest.

"I don't think I could have retrieved my hat by myself," the priest said. "Thank you very much!" He then placed his hand on the man's shoulder and said, "May God bless you." 

"I've been blessed by the priest," the young man thought.  "This must be my lucky day!"

Right then and there, he decided to go to the racetrack. In the first race he noted a horse named 'High Hat' at 20 to 1. He bet £50 and, sure enough, the horse came in first, netting him £1000. In the second race, a horse named 'Trilby' was at 30 to 1, so he bet all his money on it, and it came in first, as well.  He continued like that for some time, betting on horses with hat names.

At the end of the day the man returned home to his wife. She asked him where he'd been, and he told her. 
"So where's the money?" she said. 
"I lost it all in the ninth race. I bet on a horse named Chateau and it lost." 
"You fool, 'chateau' is a house, 'chapeau' is a hat!" exlaimed his wife. 
"It doesn't matter," he said, "the winner was some Spanish horse named Zucchetto."


"I'm not cumin!" Said Caraway.
I've done jail time for my love of fruit.. I'm a convicted grapist.
Tobacco companies kill their best customers And condom companies kill their future customers.
Why wouldn't the lobster share his toys? Because he was... shellfish.


hahahaha
A sandwich and a kit Kat walk into a bar at 9-31..... ....barman says "I'm sorry,  we don't serve snacks after 9pm"
What is Forrest Gump's password? 1forrest1
A bookseller conducting a market survey asked a woman - "Which book has helped you most in your life?"

The woman replied - "My husband's cheque book !!
Why did the company fire all of its Liberal employees and hire a bunch of illegal immigrants and Muslim refugees? The illegal immigrants and Muslim refugees actually came to work while all the Liberals shirked work to go hold signs and shout at people.
I was asked how I view lesbian relationships Apparently 'in HD' isn't the correct answer.

Shortest joke a software developer can tell: “I’ll be ready soon.”
What you can get with 57 000€? A home for a refugee. Or a shit ton of beer
As a couple gets into bed As a couple gets into bed, the husband starts to rub and kiss his wife.
She turns over and says, "I'm sorry, honey. 
I've got a gynecologist appointment tomorrow, and I want to stay fresh."
The husband sadly turns over. 
A few minutes later, he rolls back over and taps his wife. 
"Do you have a dentist appointment, too?"
Final arrangements... A woman from New York was getting her affairs in order. She wrote her will and made her final arrangements. As part of these arrangements she met with her rabbi to talk about what type of funeral service she wanted. She told her rabbi she had two final requests.

First, she wanted to be cremated, and second, she wanted her ashes scattered over Bloomindgales.

"Bloomingdales!" the rabbi said. "Why Bloomingdales?"

"That way, I am guaranteed to have my daughters visit me at least twice a week."

Matthew McConaughey set to guest edit Breibart news next week Alt-Right Alt-Right Alt-Right
A detective shows up at a crime scene A bakery has been broken into. After some investigation, a police officer checks up on the detective.

The officer asks, "How's the investigation going?"

"Not good. Hundreds of dollars worth of quality pastries have been stolen." said the detective.
 
"I heard that there's been a lot of thieves running around town lately." said the officer.

"Sure has." the detective said. "But this one takes the cake."
What place is cleaner when Israeli Tourists get out than when they get in? A Hotel Room.
Jack,"Our relationship is over." Jane,"Our relationship is what? Over."
"Hand me downs" Apparently not the right way to ask the wife to hand me our disabled baby.
What's this I hear about a new Muslim band?? Is this something kind of explosive death metal!
Wanna hear a joke about paper? Never mind. It's tearable 
What is Donald Trump's favorite word in Sign Language ddfffffddffddfffddffddddfffff
What's the difference between Hitler and Trump? The mustache.
Teacher: whoever answers ............. Teacher: whoever answers my next question, can go home.
One boy throws his bag out the window.
Teacher: who just threw that?!
Boy: Me! I’m going home now.
My mom won't let me eat while using her laptop anymore... Because when she caught me stroganoff I dropped my pennes on the keyboard. 
The electromagnetic wave arrived at the hotel, when the hotelier asks... "Do you have any baggage to check in?" - "No, I'm traveling light."
I fell asleep at a party I fell asleep at a party the other night and someone put a teabag in my mouth. I went fuckin mental. No one treats me like a mug
My gay friend really despises of fruit He cannot stand the sight of a mango.
The different between Donald Trump and Hitler If anybody can think of one! Pm me and I'll write it in this little space here -----> [   ]
I asked my shrink what we could work on to deal with my grandma's passing. She said mourning would help. I said, "No thanks, I'm married."
A man and a blonde woman in a swimsuit are stranded on a deserted island. The woman asks the man, "When was the last time you had a smoke?", she then unzips her swimsuit a little and pulls out a cigar, the man replies, "Thank you", and takes the cigar. Soon after, the woman asks the man, "When was the last time you had a drink?", she then unzips her swimsuit halfway down and pulls out a can of beer, the man replies, "Thank you my dear", and takes the can of beer. When the man had finished the beer, the woman unzips her swimsuit nearly all the way down and asks the man, "When was the last time you played around?"

The man replied, "You wouldn't have a set of golf clubs in there would you?"
A lot of folks are concerned that Trump is president given the status of minorities. But don't forget: Orange be the new black, baby.
3 guys die and go to hell So three guys die and go to hell. The first guy is approached by Satan and is asked, "why are you hear?" 

He replies, "Dude, I just love food! I love food so much my heart gave out and my stomach exploded!"

Satan looks at him and says, "ok! I'm gonna lock you up in this room here for 10 thousand years with all the delicious foods cooked by the worlds best chefs!"  The guy happily bounces his way in the room and is locked in there. 

Satan approaches the second guy and asks, "so why are you here?"  "I love to fuck! I can't get enough of it. I am always horny! I got all the STDs in world and still can't get enough!".. the guy replies. 

Satan looks at him and says, "ok! I'm gonna lock you up in this room here for 10 thousand years with all the slutty, most sexy women that have ever lived; pornstars!"  The guy runs into the room with his cock on hand and Satan locks the door. 

Satan turns to the third guy and asks, "And you? why are you here?"  They guy replies, "yo.. I just love smoking weed, man. I got so high I fuckin died. I just love to smoke."

 "Alright!".. Satan yells. "I'm gonna lock you up in this room for 10 thousand years with all the weed, bongs, papers,etc. ,"  The guy slowly walks in there with a smile and the door shuts behind him. 

10,000 years later....

Satan opens the first door and sees food half way eaten, some food is on the floor, chefs aren't doing anything and the guy is doing push-ups and is skinny. 

"I can't eat anymore! I literally ate ever I could. I'm free!!!" He grows wings and goes to heaven. 

Satan then opens the second door and sees all the women in there bored out of their minds and not doing anything. He sees the guy walking around, humming to himself. 

"I have literally fucked the sexuality out of me. I can't do this anymore." He grows wings and goes to heaven. 

Satan opens the third and final door and sees nothing has changed. The weed is still in place, the pipes still where they were. Paper is flat; not rolled up. Satan then spots the guy in the corner, in the fetal position, shaking and shivering with horns grown out of his head. 

Satan asks "what in the hell happened here!?"

The guy responds... "I've been here 10 thousand years and I ain't got a fuckin lighter."

New bike A bloke wins the lottery and decides to buy himself a Harley Davidson, he goes down to his local bike shop and after purchasing a top of the range bike, the owner of the shop tells him to coat the bike in Vaseline every time it looks like raining. That night he goes and picks his girlfriend up on his new toy and heads over to her parents house for the first time. As they arrive there, she explains to him that whenever they have dinner, don't talk. 
"If you talk," she tells him, "you have to do the pots." The man is astounded as he walks into the house as it is a complete mess. Anyway, the family all sit down for dinner not saying a word. The man decides to take advantage of the situation by groping his girlfriend's tits, yet there is not a sound from anyone. 
So he decides to shag his bird on the table, and still there is not a word. He then proceeds to do his girlfriend's mum over the table, but still, amazingly, there's not a word from anyone. Just at that moment he notices the rain on the kitchen window and remembers his precious motorbike, so he reaches into his pocket and flops the Vaseline out.
At which point his girlfriend's dad leaps up and shouts, "Okay! Okay! I'll do the fucking pots!
Why was the diamond depressed? He had been under a lot of pressure lately.
GNU/Linux can't run Photoshop.. unless you offer it WINE.  
Else you will remain stuck with a GIMPed system.
I finally got the "why did the chicken cross the road" joke The chicken dies and goes to the other side... it took me 19 years to get that joke...
What so you call an actor who paid of his house Mortgage freeman (i know its bad)
We need immigrants to do jobs that Americans don't want to do... As two thirds of Trump's wife are immigrants
I got asked why I don't have a girlfriend... "Don't need one" I replied "My bank account goes down on me everyday"
Pirate walks into a bar Pirate walks into a bar with a steering wheel in his pants. Bartender says "Hey Mr. Pirate, ya know you have a steering wheel in your pants?"
Pirate says "Yarrrrr, it's driving me nuts."
We never saw it coming. Psychiatrist: You have paranoid schizophrenia.

Patient: Who! Me or me?
Wife and husband have bought condoms with different flavours. - Darling, I will turn off the light, put one on and you guess the flavour.
As soon as he turns off the light, she takes it in the mouth and says:
- Gorgonzola!
- Wait, it is not on yet.
I tried to give myself a sex change... ...but I couldn't pull it off. 
Chinese torture A young man was wandering, lost, in a forest when he came upon a small house. Knocking on the door he was greeted by an ancient Chinese man with a long, gray beard. "I'm lost," said the man. "Can you put me up for the night?" "Certainly," the Chinese man said, "but on one condition. If you so much as lay a finger on my daughter I will inflict upon you the three worst Chinese tortures known to man." "OK," said the man, thinking that the daughter must be pretty old as well, and entered the house. Before dinner the daughter came down the stairs. She was young, beautiful and had a fantastic figure. She was obviously attracted to the young man as she couldn't keep her eyes off him during the meal. Remembering the old man's warning he ignored her and went up to bed alone. But during the night he could bear it no longer and snuck into her room for a night of passion. He was careful to keep everything quiet so the old man wouldn't hear and, near dawn, he crept back to his room, exhausted but happy. He woke to feel a pressure on his chest. Opening his eyes he saw a large rock on his chest with a note on it that read, "Chinese Torture 1: Large rock on chest." "Well, that's pretty crappy," he thought. "If that's the best the old man can do then I don't have much to worry about." He picked the boulder up, walked over to the window and threw the boulder out. As he did so he noticed another note on it that read "Chinese Torture 2: Rock tied to left testicle." In a panic he glanced down and saw the line that was already getting close to taut. Figuring that a few broken bones was better than castration, he jumped out of the window after the boulder. As he plummeted downward he saw a large sign on the ground that read, "Chinese Torture 3: Right testicle tied to bedpost"
Why did the scarecrow get a promotion? He was outstanding in his field.
What's the difference between a tiny penis and a joke? My date didn't laugh at my jokes. 
Did you hear about the Italian that died? He pasta way
Why cant you play cards on a rowboat? Because you're sitting on the deck...
Whats the difference between a garbanzo bean and a chickpea? I've never had a garbanzo bean on my face. 
FOUND Lady’s purse left in my car while parked. A classified ad in the paper:

FOUND Lady’s purse left in my car while parked.

The owner can have same by paying for this ad. 

If she will explain to my wife how the purse got in my car, I will 

pay for the ad. Phone 555-xxx-7610.

A programmer goes shopping A room mate asked his friend who is a programmer to go shopping. 

"hey, can you buy a bottle of milk? Oh and if they have eggs, buy 12"

So the programmer went shopping. 

When he got back, he bought 12 bottle of milk and his room mate asked

"why the heck did you bought 12 bottle of milk?!" 

The programmer responded. 

"they have eggs"
Miss France just won Miss Universe The French finally won something.
Doctor: Hi, how are you? Patient: I'm well thanks.

Doctor: Then get the fuck out.
Why did Carrie Fisher cross the road? She didn't...

She's dead.
A close friend of mine asked me "What do you look for in a girl?" And I said "My dick, and if it's not there then that's gonna change."
After a tumultuous couple of weeks in the spotlight and under the microscope, president Trump flies to New York to spend a night with his wife. As he is about to walk into the penthouse, he gets a call from Priebus. "Mr President", he says, "what should we do about the abortion bill"

Trump, annoyed especially about the timing barks back "who gives a shit? Just fucking pay it!"
People don't realize Trump is the healthiest president in our history. He's been training his whole life to run the aryan race.
What's the difference between a bag of coke and a toddler Eric Clapton wouldn't let a bag of coke fall out a window
How do you make a hormone? Don't pay her
A husband and his wife are on a beach... NSFW A husband an his wife are on a date at the beach.
It's mid afternoon an him and his wife are both sun bathing. 
His wife casually turns on her stomach and asks "can you rub some sunscreen on my back?"
He then grabs the bottle and gets on top of his wife.
"Right on your back?" 
He asks, and she nods slightly.
"What's taking so long?" She asks, and he replies, "it's coming honey, just rubbing my self down first." 

A man's adoptive daughter begins to get sexually attracted to her father... A man's adoptive daughter begins to get sexually attracted to her father.

She starts to advance on him slowly, starting with slightly skimpier clothing, and slowly moving on to blatant flirting and leaving nudes around the house.

One day, the father is climbing up the stairs when he hears a strange noise. Under further investigation, it seemed like the noise was coming from his daughter's room.

He opened the door to find his daughter naked on the bed, pleasuring herself. She looks at him, only mildly startled, and continues to touch herself.

"Please fuck me, Dad. I'm so horny." She sits up and spreads her legs.

Her father, having been resisting temptation for months, finally caves. He rushes over and shoves her down back onto the bed. He undos his belt, unzips his pants, and leans in to whisper seductively:





"Hi horny, I'm Dad."
When I grow up and have kids... I think I will stay a virgin to set a good example.
Stop it with the 9/11 jokes, my dad died in 9/11 His last words were "Allahu Akbar"
Tom dies and wakes up in a strange place. He looks around and sees beautiful surroundings, as if he's at a 5 star resort.

A man in a red outfit walks up to him and says, "Hey buddy, welcome to Hell! I'm the Devil!"

Tom looks around, confused. "Um...I didn't think this was going to be what hell looks like?"

The Devil says, "Oh, those bible thumpers on Earth are always giving this place a bad name.  This place is great! We have different stuff going on all the time. All that stuff they tell you is a sin. Like today's Monday. You like to drink, right?"

Tom says, "Yeah, I like to drink..."

The Devil says, "You're gonna love Mondays. Monday is drinking day! You can drink and drink, get completely wasted, and the next day you wake up, no hangover, nothing! You like to eat, right?"

Tom starts to get more excited. He says, "Yeah I like to eat!"

The Devil says, "You're going to love Tuesdays. Tuesday is food day! We got these great chefs and they make tons of great food. You eat and eat, stuff yourself like a glutton, and you never gain weight! You like drugs, right?"

"Hell yeah!" says Tom.

"Man, I tell ya, you're gonna love Wednesdays. Wednesday is drug day. Any drug you want, as much as you want, you can get completely fucked up and it doesn't matter because you're dead! Hey, you like getting fucked in the ass, right?"

Tom says, "Uh- no....."

The Devil says, "Ohhhhh- you're gonna hate Thursdays..."


Trump's wives were immigrants. Proving again that immigrants will do jobs Americans won't.
Guy runs out of gasoline. Nearest gas station in 20 miles out, so he unzips and fills up with pee. Cop driving by stops him and asks is this normal? 

nope its super. .
Why don't you ever see a crow as roadkill? They always have another crow as a lookout saying "car, car, car"
Breaking news...Justin Trudeau just announced a plan to build a wall between the US and Canada, with the US paying for the fence. ...yeah just as fucking stupid as as it sounds:(
My girlfriend is like the square root of -100 A perfect 10, but completely imaginary.
What gets wetter the more it dries? "What?", says the interrogation suspect.

"Not this."
I said to my girlfriend that she would look sexier with her hairback Apparently thats an insensitive thing to say to a cancer patient 
Two politicians die and arrive at the Pearly Gates. Two politicians die and arrive at the Pearly Gates.  St. Peter says "You get to choose which place you want to go to.  I'll show you each place today and you can sleep on it and decide tomorrow."  So he takes them to heaven and everybody's sitting on gold jeweled thrones playing harps and singing God's praises.  They both say "Oh, this looks good."  

But St. Peter insists on bringing them to the other place.  The Devil answers the door and brings them to a big banquet hall with every kind of food and delicacy to choose from-- steak and lobster and caviar and fresh vegetables and fruits.  The wine is flowing, and there's plenty of coke, and there are some gorgeous women who seem interested in the 2 politicians.  All their friends are there singing and dancing and telling jokes.  

Then they leave and go to sleep outside the Pearly Gates for the night.  The next morning St. Peter asks "Well, which place do you want?"  They say "Well, heaven  is a really nice place.  But I think we'll be more comfortable down in hell with my friends."      

So St. Peter brings them down to hell.  The Devil answers the door.  There are all these people standing in excrement up to their butts, drinking coffee.  Then the Devil says "Okay, coffee break's over, go back to standing on your heads now."  

The politicians get mad,  "Why did you deceive us, St. Peter?" they ask.  St. Pete Says "This is the Devil's place.  Talk to him about it."  So they turn to the Devil and say "That's not fair.  Why did you deceive us?"  

The Devil says "Yesterday we were campaigning.  This morning you voted for us."  
North Korea bans sarcasm What a great idea!
One day a little girl  got lost in the woods, and she sees an owl, and asks it: 'Do you know where my mother is?' and the owl responds, 'Why the hell would I know where your mother is? Are you stupid? And why are you fairy tale children always getting lost in forests and hallucinating about animals that can talk?' And then the owl swooped down and ripped the little girls face off and ate her eyeballs. And the the owl hooted. Who-Who.
A man walks into a restaurant and is told that there will be an estimated hour of waiting for a table The man responds to this news by asking "Do you know who I am?"

Not recognizing him, the host immediately gives him the next available table in order to make it seem like he does.

"Does this table meet your expectations?" Says the host.

The man again replies "Do you know who I am?"

Once again not knowing who the man is, the host directs him to the nearest booth.

After a few minutes of waiting, the man is visited by the waitress. 

"Hello, may I take your order?" She asks, politely.

The man once again asks "Do you know who I am?" with more of an attitude.

The waitress does not recognize him either, and simply takes his menu back and says "I'm incredibly sorry sir"

After more waiting, the man is given the finest dish the chef has ever prepared. 

After finishing the delicious meal, he is presented with the bill.

After receiving it, he asks for the final time "Do you know who I am?"

"Of course. Sorry sir, it's on the house." The waitress replies.

After he leaves the restaurant, the host says to the waitress "Do you know who that man was? He sounded like he was kind of a big deal."

The waitress replies "No, but if he was  important, why didn't we know him?"

The two then go back to work as if nothing happenied.

Meanwhile, outside the restaurant, the man sighs and says to himself, "Why won't anyone help me with my amnesia."
A journalisy doing an article about life in prison He asks inmates about their daily routine

Prisoner1: i wake up eat,exercice, do laundry and take a shower

Prisoner2: i wake up read a book eat and after that i do laundry

Prisoner3: i wake up take a shower, eat and take a walk.

The journalist then asks him, dont you do laundry like the others?

Prisoner3 smiling : no silly, im laundry.
What do you call a difficult problem in chemistry? A chemystery.
Why aren't we letting Islamic people get off at airports? I thought we wanted to keep them off our planes, not on them.
Just got back from Chernobyl And boy are my legs arms!
What did OSHA say about this joke? NSFW
A sodium ion went to rob a bank. It was charged, without a doubt.
The story of a man and his pregnant wife My wife is prego, but we like to get kinky anyway. One night things begin to get particularly saucy - I'm sticking my noodle in her when I notice weird chunks coming out, so I turn on the lights. It's red everywhere and she's obviously not on her period, I look up at her glassy, jarred facial expression. Worried, I rush her into my car and speed all the way to the hospital, she's still bleeding. By the time we get there she's not bleeding much more but all color has drained and she looks colorless and almost transparent, almost in a vegetative state. We storm into the emergency room and explain everything to the nearest doctor. The doctor replies, "Sorry, there is nothing we can do." "WHY THE FUCK NOT??" I exclaim. "We don't operate on empty jars of spaghetti sauce."
What did the Kool-aid man say about Donald Trump's proposal? OH Yeaaaaaaa!
What's brown and sticky? A stick.

I wood've thought of something more original, but I tree-ly can't be bothered, so here you go.
A woman gets on a bus with her baby The bus driver says: "That's the ugliest baby that I've ever seen." The woman goes to the rear of the bus and sits down, fuming. She says to a man next to her, "That driver just insulted me!" The man says, "You go right up there and tell him off! Go ahead, I'll hold your monkey for you." 
You know what the worst part is about dating a Japanese girl? If I ever decide to break up with her I will have to drop the bomb twice before she gets the message
A girl lobster meets a crab boy... ...they quickly hit it off and start dating.  Unfortunately, the girl lobsters father is dead set against interspecies relationships and tells his daughter "If you keep seeing that crab boy, I'm cutting you off, no daughter of mine will be with a 'sideways walker', I will not stand for it."  Upset, the girl lobster tells her crab boyfriend about her fathers feelings about 'sideways walkers', the boy crab in love with the girl lobster resolves that he will learn to walk forwards and backwards to prove his love and win her fathers blessing.  He practices for weeks and finally overcomes his natural urge to walk sideways.  

Ready to show his true loves father that love conquers all he arrived at the girl lobsters house.  As he is making his way up the sidewalk, in a perfectly straight forward line he hears from inside the house "that does it Lola, (girl lobsters name apparently) that good for nothing crab is here, and he's already drunk."

There is a fine line between a numerator and a denominator. Only a fraction of people will find this funny.
What do all pharaohs have in common? Toot.
Today I went to the protest The protesters aren't going to mace themselves 
How many mice does it take to screw in a light bulb? Two, but how in the hell did they get in there?
A traveling companion. A guy walks into a bar with a piece of asphalt  under his arm and orders, "I'll have a pint, please. And one for the road."
Teacher: Tell me a sentence that starts with an "I" Student: I is the.... Teacher: Stop! Never put 'is' after an "I". Always put 'am' after an "I". Student: OK. I am the ninth letter of the alphabet.
How dare you say I'm dumb! Would a dummy get a 'A' on there IQ test? Hmm? 
I think these protesters are sending the wrong message... because they keep telling me to Love Trump's Hate.
One of the most important skill my parents taught me is... How to tell what is junk mail and real mail.
Trump says "The less immigrants we let into our country the better!" Pence, correcting Trump, says "The Fewer"
Trump says "Whoa Mike don't call me that just yet"
A Jews mother dies... And he decides to send her back to Israel, per her will, to be buried. So he sends the coffin back with a letter atop the casket. His brother opens it and it reads: 

Dear brother, 

Ima died and wants to be laid to rest here. Please follow her request and bury her here. Also, I have sent kosher cheeses within the casket for Binyamin. There are also condiments near the cheeses for consumption. There is fresh toothpaste in the crook of her arm for Bluma. She has gold necklaces around her neck. Those are for your wife.   The reeboks on her foot, those are for you, my brother. She also has five Nike shirts on that I got on clearance for my nephews. She also has blankets underneath her for all of you. She also has the special lingerie on that Sister requested. Please preserve her dignity and bury her as soon as possible.

P.S. If you need anything else, just ask. Abba-leh (dad) is not feeling well

*This joke was originally told in Urdu about Mehmans, who in Pakistan are stereotyped very similarly to Jews. I also heard it orally but I hope I captured its essence*
If there's a sock on my doorknob... It means I'm having sex with the other one.
A country that shares borderlines with 10 other countries cannot be entered because it is made of limits
Mike Rowe Penis Women have told me I have a Mike Rowe penis. I guess it must be because they think it's pretty strong and does dirty jobs... but I think it's a little small myself.
Two guys sit at a bar... One says to the other "I've got really bad news." 

"What is it?", the friend replies. 

"I'm HIV positive". 

"Really?!, that's terrible. Is there anything I can do?".

"Yea, can you tell your wife as soon as you get home".

The orphanage i run, burned down today with the lives of sixty children Thank fuck i don't have to tell their parents ....
Back in my day we used to only have chalkboards. The new whiteboards they use are Remarkable
I rather have a bottle of soda for President than Donald Trump. This way, we could truly have a Liter of the Free World.

Next time somebody calls your home phone... Say "Can I call you back? I'm driving."
A man asked me, which is worse, ignorance or apathy? I told him, "I don't know, and I don't care."
All of these reposts are like kids with cancer They never get old.
Which is better a stool or a box to stand on? You stand on a stool, though I prefer the ladder
I called the ASPCA hotline to tell them I'd just found six Badgers in a suitcase by the side of the road "Are they moving?" asked the operator

"Not sure" I replied "But that would explain the suitcase"
Pasteurize: Too far to see.
What do you call a Pokemon who is trying to quit smoking? Vaporeon
Going to work My boss told me yesterday, “Don’t dress for the job you have, dress for the job you want”. But when I turned up at the office today in Ghostbusters gear, the bastard said I was fired.
What do alcoholics and necropheliacs have in common? They both love to crack open a cold one.
A dog went to a telegram office Took out a blank form and wrote: "Woof. Woof. Woof. Woof. Woof. Woof. Woof. Woof. Woof." The clerk examined the paper and politely told the dog, "There are only nine words here. You could send another 'Woof' for the same price." The dog replied, "but that would make no sense at all!" 
In the beginning there was nothing. God said, 'Let there be light!' And there was light. There was still nothing, but you could see it a whole lot better.
Whats more offensive than black face? Orange face.
A lady goes to her priest one day... ... and tells him, "Father, I have problem. I have two female parrots that used to live in a house of ill repute, but they only know how to say one thing." 

"What do they say?" the priest inquired.

They say, "Hi, we're hoo-kers! Do you want to have some fun?"

"That's obscene!" the priest exclaimed, then he thought for a moment. "You know," he said, "I may have a solution to your problem. I have two male talking parrots, which I have taught to pray and read the Bible. Bring your two parrots over to my house, and we'll put them in the cage with Francis and Peter. My parrots can teach your parrots to praise and worship, and your parrots are sure to stop saying... that phrase in no time."


"Thank you," the woman responded, "this may very well be the solution."

The next day, she brought her female parrots to the priest's house. As he ushered her in, she saw that his two male parrots were inside their cage holding rosary beads and praying. Impressed, she walked over and placed her parrots in with them.

After a few minutes, the female parrots cried out in unison: "Hi, we're hoo-kers! Do you want to have some fun?"
There was stunned silence. Shocked, one male parrot looked over at the other male parrot and exclaimed, "Put the beads away, Frank. Our prayers have been answered."
Two hunters are out in the woods when one of them collapses. He doesn't seem to be breathing and his eyes are glazed. The other man pulls out his cell phone and calls emergency services. He gasps to the operator, "My friend is dead! What can I do?" The operator in a calm, soothing voice replies, "Take it easy. I can help. First, let's make sure he's dead." There is a silence, then a shot is heard.

Back on the phone, the hunter says, "OK, now what?"
Favorite math topics of Karma Whores Multiplication and derivatives
Photons aren't Catholic. No mass.
It's like we're living in a video game... "President Evil"
My girlfriend told me I look "uncool" with a bike helmet on.. Well you know I'd rather look uncool than fall and split my head open during sex.
Mary Tyler Moore died this week. She didn't make it after all...
Two old friends are camping. [nsfw] In bed, in the dark :
"Are you jerking off? 

-Yeah. 

-Would you mind jacking your own dick?"
A friend of mine tried to annoy me with bird puns... But I soon realized that toucan play at that game
How many hipsters does it take to screw in a lightbulb? It's an obscure number. You've probably never heard of it.
My girlfriend tried to make me have sex on the hood of her Honda Civic... But if I'm gonna have sex, it's going to be on my own Accord.
I had a cocaine​ joke, but now I can't find it It makes me really mad because I had it all lined up
Why doesn't communism work in a school enviroment? Because everyone would get the same Marx.
I was appalled to learn about Hitler's uprising. Anne Frankly, I did Nazi that coming.
Got in a fight with my boner this morning; Don't worry i beat it single handedly.
What is the difference between Courtney Love and a porcupine? A porcupines needle won't give you AIDS
What do you call a horse with a horn and no balls? A Eunuchorn
Why did the farmer start a punk rock band? He was tired of Haulin' Oats 
Why did Colonel Sanders keep his eleven herbs and spices a secret? Because he was ashamed of them
Why was Britney Spears addicted to the cocaine? Because Kevin fed her lines
Redditors are like alchemists. They try to turn their nonsense into gold.
Why was the chef fired from the restaurant? He was caught cooking the books
What's the difference between Bill Clinton and Donald Trump? Bill fucked fewer people in the Oval Office.
What's the difference between Courtney Love and the American flag? It's not proper to piss on the American flag
What's the difference between an Irish wedding and an Irish funeral? 1 less drunk
Two football players, Bubba and Tiny, were taking an important exam. If they failed, they would be on academic probation and not allowed to play in the big game the following week. 

The exam was “fill in the blank” and the last question read, “Old MacDonald had a_____.” Bubba was stumped -- he had no idea what to answer, but he knew he needed to get this one right to be sure he passed. 

Making sure the professor wasn't watching, he tapped Tiny in the shoulder. “Tiny, what's the answer to the last question?” 

Tiny laughed, then looked around to make sure the professor hadn't noticed. He turned to Bubba and said, “Bubba, you're so stupid. Everyone knows that Old MacDonald had a FARM.” 

“Oh yeah,” said Bubba, “I remember now.” he picked up his No. 2 pencil and started to write the answer in the blank. Then he stopped. Tapping Tiny on the shoulder, he whispered, “Tiny, how do you spell farm?” 

“You are really dumb, Bubba. that's so easy,” hissed Tiny, “farm is spelled ‘E-I-E-I-O’.”

The weather forecast is looking pretty bad over in Germany. There's a high chance of heil.
Mexicans are upset over Trump's wall. A lot of Mexicans are upset over Trump's planned wall. I hope they get over it.
What's the difference between a Jew and a pizza. Pizza can have pepperoni, Jews can't.
Did you hear about the Australian guy that was dancing with my computer? He was waltzing my tilde.
What do you call a Nazi cetacean? Adolfin.
My wife bought a new plant for for the house. I didn't like it at first... ...but it's starting to grow on me.
My neighbor caught me peeing on his lawn after a snow storm. Don't tell me not to pee on your lawn. This is my lawn, see, it's got my name on it!
Why is it so loud in Costco? Everything comes in high volumes.
[Long]A squad of soldiers-in-training stood in line to get their practice weapons... ...for an upcoming simulated battle. As the last guy got up to the sergeant, the sergeant said, “sorry son, we’re all out. Take this broom instead.” The private looked puzzled so the sergeant explained, “When you see the enemy, point the broom at them and say ‘bangity, bangity, bang.’ Don’t worry, it will work fine.”

So the private and the rest of his squad headed out to the battle field. Shortly after they started marching, the private spotted an enemy. Reluctantly, he put the broom up to his shoulder, aimed down the handle and shouted, “bangity, bangity, bang.” Much to his surprise, the enemy fell over. A few moments later, he spotted another enemy, pointed his broom, and shouted “bangity, bangity, bang.” Again, the enemy fell over. 

This, of course energized the private so he jumped up, pointed his broom and shouted “bangity, bangity, bang,” “bangity, bangity, bang,” ‘bangity, bangity, bang.’ Enemies fell all around him. 

Off in the distance, he spotted another enemy, raised his broom and shouted “bangity, bangity, bang.” This time, however, the enemy didn’t fall over. As the enemy got closer, the private pointed his broom and shouted even louder, “bangity, bangity, bang.” Still, the enemy didn’t fall and, instead, just kept marching toward the private. 

The enemy got within feet of the private and one more time he aimed his broom and screamed, “bangity, bangity, bang.” But the enemy just kept on marching. He walked into the private, knocked him over, stepped on him and kept on walking. And as he went by, the private heard the enemy say, “tankity, tankity, tank, tankity, tankity, tank.”

I was bored with my life, and wanted to change something. I changed my mind. 
My friend asked me, "Where's my book of opera puns?"  I said, "It's overture house." 
An old Jewish man is dying at home in bed. His entire family is gathered around him.

Sarah, the man calls for his wife...

Im here dear.

And the kids?

We are all here too dad.

And the grandchildren?

We are all here.

Well, if you are all here then why is the light in the kitchen turned on?
Did you hear about trumps wall? I can't tell you, you might not get over it!
No matter how hard you push the envelope It still remains stationery 
I once dreamed that I fell down a flight of stairs. I was so relieved when I woke up safely in the hospital.
The Mexican drug lord El Chapo has been extradited to the United States... It's still unclear which cabinet post he'll be appointed to.
Will glass coffins be popular in future? Remains to be seen. 
The person who made the shovel should receive an award It was groundbreaking work.
I was walking down the street the other day and I see a man in a zoot suit checking the time on his pocket watch. I go up to him and I say, "hey, did you just come out of a time machine or something?" Hey says, "no, that's just the wind chill, it only makes it feel like we're in the 20's."
Say "Rise Up Lights" out loud You just said "Razor Blades" in an Australian accent
So I took a practice test on photons today... It didn't matter.
What do Hanlon's razor, Occam's razor, Poe's Law and Godwin's Law each have in common? The Donald Trump presidency.
You Can’t Teach an Old Dog to Fly A woman called our airline  customer-service desk asking if she could take her dog on board.

“Sure,” I said, “as long as you provide your own kennel.” I further explained that the kennel needed to be large enough for the dog to stand up, sit down, turn around, and roll over.

The customer was flummoxed:  “I’ll never be able to teach him all of that by tomorrow!”
Reddit is really a green community, considering all the recycled content on here.

I found a new passion yesterday pairing socks. I guess I just enjoy bringing sole mates together.
What do you call a cow with no legs? Ground beef.
Why are there no cats on mars? Curiosity
Why did the PowerPoint cross the road? To get to the other slide.
Life is a lot like chess You've always got to be thinking two steps ahead.

And most people want to be white.
Even if they all unite against Trump, those seven countries won't get off the list A seven nation army couldn't hold Trump back.
Knock knock...... You:  Who's there? ....

Me:  Better eat up...... 

You:.....


I just wanted a drink. Stopped at Speedway to buy a drink. When I pulled in, I noticed these two cops watching a woman who was smoking while fueling up. I'm thinking, "Wow...what an idiot! The police are standing right there!"
I go in and get my drink. As I was paying, I hear someone scream, "Look outside!" OMG!! The woman's arm was on fire!!!
She's running around like a chicken with its head cut off, waving her arm around and just going nuts. We all went outside and watched the cops put her on the ground and put the fire out with an extinguisher. After all the craziness, I start walking to my car and I see the cops put her in handcuffs. The guy next to me is like, "What the heck?!?" (I, of course, stick around because it looks like the guy is a jerk and I want to see what is going to happen next.) He asked the cops, "What in the world are you arresting her for? After all, wasn't catching her arm on fire punishment enough?"
I kid you not...the cop looked him dead in the eye and said, "For waving a Firearm"...
Rumour has it Eminem has converted to Islam. From now on, he will call himself "Muslim Shady."
My daughter just told me she's infertile. "That's a great joke," I said. "I can't wait to tell it to my grandchildren." 
A little boy walks into a whore house dragging a dead frog... He goes up to the man at the counter and say "excuse me sir, I'd like a woman please."

The man replies "sorry son, but you're much too young."

So the little boy puts a hundred dollar bill on the counter. 

And the man says "okay go to room 4."

The the little boy says "wait I need a woman with active herpes." 

The man says "sorry all our girls are clean."

The boy puts another hundred dollar bill on the counter. 

The says "okay go to room 2."

So the little boy goes to the room with the prostitute and his dead frog, is in there for twenty minutes then comes out and goes to leave. But the man, full of curiosity cannot resist asking the boy "why did you want herpes and what's with the dead frog?"

The little boy replies "when I go home I will have sex with the babysitter, giving her the herpes. Then when my dad drives her home, she will give it to him. Then when my parents have sex tonight, he will give it to my mom. And when my father goes to work in the morning my mom will give it to the pool boy and he's the BASTARD THAT RAN OVER MY FROG!"
Did you hear about the butter on toast? I can't tell you, you might spread it!
The propellor of a plane is actually a giant fan for the pilot When the fan stops, you can actually see the pilot start sweating
Whoever stole my copy of Microsoft Office, I will track you down... You have my Word.
A psychiatrist was conducting group therapy with four young mothers and their small children... A psychiatrist was conducting group therapy with four young mothers and their small children. "You all have obsessions," the doctor observed.

To the 1st mother, he said, "You are obsessed with eating. You've even named your daughter Candy." He looks to the 2nd mother, "Your obsession is with money. Again, it manifests itself in your child's name, Penny." He looks to the 3rd mother. "Your obsession is alcohol. This manifests itself in your child's name, Brandy."

At this point, the 4th mother gets up, takes her little boy by the hand and says... "Come on, Dick, we're leaving!"
How many Shakers does it take to screw in a lightbulb? None. Shakers can't screw
The day after Thanksgiving is often the biggest capitalist/materialistic shopping day every year. I'm protesting it this year, and had to think of the movement's slogan... Black Fridays Matter.
An atheist is walking alone in the woods When a bear appears and starts running towards the man. The man closes his eyes and screams "Oh God help me". He opens his eyes again and the bear is standing still with his paws only inches from his face, the bear is not moving at all, almost like time stood still. A loud voice is heard from the sky. 
- God: Why are you calling on me now? You never believed in me before. 
- Man: Help me this bear is going to eat me. 
- God: Sorry I can not help you I only help Christian's. 
- Man: Well, make me a Christian then. 
- God: You do not have enough faith to be a Christian, even this bear has more faith than you. 
- Man: Please, can you at least turn the bear into a Christian? 
Suddenly the bear starts to move again. The bear lowers both of its paws towards it's chest and puts them together. The man can hear the bear say under it's breath "Dear God thank you for this food you have provided for me." 
How many homeless people does it take to screw in a lightbulb? None. Homeless people can't have light bulbs
What is definition of indefinitely? When your balls are touching her ass, you are in-definatlly 
I asked Kellyanne Conway for her email And she said "oh you mean my alternative fax?"
A nursery school teacher says to her class, "Who can use the word 'definitely' in a sentence?" First a little girl says, "The sky is definitely blue."
The teacher says, "Sorry, Amy, but the sky can sometimes be gray, or black."

A second little boy says,"Trees are definitely green."
"Sorry, but in the autumn, the trees are brown."

Then little Johnny from the back of the class stands up and asks, "Does a fart have lumps?"
The teacher looks horrified and says, "Johnny! Of course not!!!"
"OK...then I DEFINITELY just shit my pants!"

I'm going to post a joke I hope it dosen't get [deleted]
What do female geologists do as a side job? Prostitution. They quite enjoy studying hard things!
A masochist and a sadist are doing their thing… The masochist says: "Hit me" and the sadist answers: "no…"
I used to think babysitting was just a job teenagers did to make a quick buck Then I saw how much Kellyanne Conway makes.
What did the math book say to the literature book? You're so full of great stories, I'm just filled with problems
I like my women like I like my pies... Still warm.
A happy 80 year old man goes to see his doctor Doctor: Why are you so happy?

Old Man: My 19 year old wife is pregnant! Can you believe it?!

Doctor: Wow, that great news! You know, I have a story to tell you.

Old Man: Go ahead 

Doctor: I once had a friend. He would go hunting every weekend. One day he forgot to bring his gun. He brought his umbrella instead. 

Old Man: Ok...

Doctor: He then saw a bear. Not knowing what to do, he opened the umbrella, and poof, the bear died.

Old Man: How's that possible? You can't kill a bear with an umbrella

Doctor: Exactly. Somebody else must've shot the bear.
TIL that the Beatles had to change the lyrics to Hello Goodbye because it was too "british". The original was "Oi Mate Piss Off"
A blonde woman wants to buy a Tv On a saturdayafternoon a blonde her tv stopped working so, she had to buy a new one ofcourse.

Once in the store she searched for the perfect television. Once she had found one she called an employee and said:
*''I'd like to buy this television, please"*
The employee answered:
*''sorry miss I don't sell my goods to blonde women, please leave my store."*
She left angrily but still in need for a television so she went back, but with a black wig on.

Back in the store she went to the tv she wanted and asked the employee again:
*''Sir, I would like to buy this television, please could you help me carrying it? ''* 
He replied *''miss, I already told you that I won't sell my goods to blonde women. Just leave my shop now, please''*

She ripped off her wig and yelled **HOW THE HELL DID YOU KNOW I'M BLONDE?! MY WIG COVERED IT UP PERFECTLY**
The man replies calm to her *''Because the thing you want to buy isn't a tv it's a fucking microwave''*


What is the hardest part about your wife telling you she has AIDS? Acting surprised.
A man dies and goes to heaven He sees a bunch of clocks on the wall and wonders why they're there. So he goes to ask Jesus and Jesus says "Those are lie clocks, they represent the amount of times someone has lied while they're on earth", Jesus then shows him a clock that has only ticked one second and states "See, this is Mother Teresa's lie clock, indicating see has only lied once". Interested the man asks where Donald Trump's "lie clock" is, Jesus says, "Unfortunately it had to be disabled, Einstein was getting upset that the hands were moving faster than the speed of light". 
What do you say when you see a Nazi trip and fall? "Are you Alt-right?"
How does one go from being a doctor to an Uber driver? They move to America.  
A monk is allowed to say only two words every year Per his oath of silence, a monk is only allowed to say two words every year. After his first year, he comes before the head abbot to speak his two words.

"Better Food."

The head abbot understands and obliges the monk, hiring a new chef and improving the food quality at the monastery.

A year later, the monk appears to speak his next two words.

"Warmer Blankets."

The head abbot gets right on it and purchases new blankets for the monk.

The next year, the monk appears once again for his annual two words.

"I quit."

The head abbot replies, "Well good, all you've done since you got here is complain."
Who is Donald Trumps favorite basketball player? John Wall

Get it?
The frequency of sexual activity of senior males. The frequency of sexual activity of senior males depends on where they were born. 

Statistics just released from Statistics Canada and The United Nations B.O.H. Team, reveal that: North American, Australian, New Zealanders 
and British men between 60 and 80 years of age, will on average, have sex two to three times per week, (and a small number a lot more), whereas Japanese men, in exactly the same age group, will have sex only once or twice per year if they are lucky. 

This has come as very upsetting news to both me and most of my buddies at the golf club, as none of us had any idea that we were Japanese.

Why did the chicken cross the road? I was hoping you would just upvote.
If Fifth Harmony was unable to perform at the NHL All Star... They can still have an option to work from home via satellite.
What did Bill Clinton say when asked why Hillary lost? "Not sure, she never used to go down."
Why did the letters A through Y hate the Jews? Because they were Not Z.
TIL the current Russian President once nearly placed a bomb in a friendly naval vessel. Wait, am I Putin this in the wrong sub?
How many potatoes does it take to kill an Irish man? Zero.
Why don't computers have any brothers? They are all trans-sisters.
Jesus at a restaurant in Heaven... "Holy cow!"

"Yes, Lord. I am both you server and your steak. How would you like me cooked?"

"Well done, my good and faithful sirloin."
A Christian is out on the ocean when his boat capsizes... He immediately starts praying. After half an hour a boat pulls up. "Hey! Need some help?" "No thanks! God will save me!" So the boat speeds off. 

After another hour another boat pulls up. "Hey there! Need any help?" "No thanks! God will save me!" So the boat speeds off. 

After a grueling two hours treading water, a third boat pulls up. "You need some help?" "No thanks! God will save me!" So the third boat moves along.

Hours pass. Too tired to tread water anymore, the Christian sinks and drowns. Standing at the gates to heaven, God shows up to let him in.

"God! Why didn't you save me?!"
God just shakes his head, "I sent you three damn boats! What more do you want?"
What kind of ships can't go in salt water? Snail-boats
Dear Muslim refugees: just pretend to be Christian. That's what most Christians do anyways. 
What do you call a white duck? A quacker.

A man gets pulled over for speeding... And he's worried about what's going to happen, as he's close to losing his licence.

The officer walks up and before he can say anything the guy says, 'Hey are you out here selling tickets again for the policemans ball?'

The officer respond 'Policemen don't have balls'
A guy is stranded on an island with only a Doberman and a pig for company. There's plenty of food and water, and the weather is beautiful, so he's doing alright - but after a few months he gets lonely... 

The pig starts to look more and more attractive - soft, pink flesh, round buttocks, etc. But every time this poor guy makes an advance towards the pig, the Doberman snarls at him and once almost bit his leg. Very frustrating. 

One day the guy sees a speck on the horizon, so he swims out there and it turns out to be a dinghy, cast adrift, and in the bottom of the boat is a beautiful woman, unconscious. He drags her to shore and brings her into his hut and slowly nurses her back health. Finally she is well enough to walk and she says to him "Thank you, thank you for saving my life. I don't know how I can ever repay you. I'll do anything for you, anything, just name it." 

The guy thinks for a minute and says, "Would you mind taking my dog for a walk?"
Wife asks why I bring my ccw to church... Because you can never predict when there will be a mass shooting. 
A man walks into a bar with his dog A man walks into a bar with his dog and orders two glasses of whiskey. He proposes a toast and both he and his dog empty their glasses. The girl behind the bar is surprised and asks: 'Can your dog perform other tricks?'. 

'But of course', the man answers, 'he can even gratify a woman'. Anxious to know more the girl leads the man and the dog into a little room above the bar. She undresses and full of expectation she lies down on the bed. The dog looks at her and does nothing, and the man then shouts to the dog, 'OK. Just ONE more time, let me show you how it's done".
Horse walks into a bar... ..Barman: "Why the long face?"
Swallow is a bird or a fish? It's an order.
Anyone care for a limerick? There once was a man from Nantucket 
Who wanted to vacation in Phuket
But changed his mind
On where to unwind
Because he'd rather not shit in a bucket.
What does NASCAR really stand for? Non Athletic Sport Centered Around Rednecks
My wife and her twin were standing next to each other in the kitchen Well, long story short, I grabbed the wrong butt and my brother in law was not amused 
Cleaning ladies: The new craze that's sweeping the nation
What's the opposite of critical thinking? Critical theory.
A man and his camel There was a guy riding through the desert on his camel. He had been traveling so long that he felt the need to have sex. Obviously there were no women in the desert so the man turned to his camel. 

He tried to position himself to have sex with his camel but the camel ran away. The man ran to catch up to the camel and got back on and started to ride again. Soon he was feeling the urge to have sex again so once again he turned to his camel. The camel refused by running away. So he caught up to it again and got back on. 

Finally after riding the camel through the whole desert, the man came to a road. There was a broken down car with three big chested beautiful blondes sitting in it. He went up to them and asked the women if they needed any help. The hottest girl said ,"If you fix our car we will do anything you want!" 

The man luckily knew a thing or two about cars and fixed it in a flash. When he finished, the three girls asked,"How could we ever repay you Mr?" 
After thinking for a short while he replied,"Could you hold my camel?"
A Young Brunette Goes into the Doctor's Office A young brunette goes into the doctor's office and says that her body hurts wherever she touches it. 

"Impossible" says the doctor, "show me". 

She takes her finger and pushes her elbow and screams in agony. 
She pushes her knee and screams, pushes her ankle and screams and so it goes on. 

The doctor says, "You're not really a brunette are you? You're really a blonde". 

She says "Yes, doctor".

"I thought so." the doctor says, then continues: "Your finger is broken".
A Japanese man walks into a gun store... He asks the cashier, "Do you have any Rugers?"

"Of course we do," says the cashier, and he dashes back into the stockroom. 5 minutes later he returns with one of each gun on Ruger's entire product line. Rifles, shotguns, pistols, all brand-new, still coated in grease from the factory. "Which one would you like to try?" the cashier asks.

The Japanese man looks over the row of 30 guns placed in front of him. After a moment, he turns back to the cashier and says, "None of them."

"None?" the cashier asks incredulously. "Sir, this is every type of gun Ruger makes! Why would you ask to see the Rugers if you weren't interested in any of them?"

The Japanese man calmly replies, "Obviousry you're not famiriar with antique German weaponry of the Weimar era. Very werru, I wirru rook for a Ruger somewhere eresu!"
President Obama wants to talk Michelle Obama into an open marriage Michelle: Barry, where is this coming from? This is very sudden! Our marriage has been very happy even under all the stress of this presidency.

Obama: I've been in the closet about this for a while, but I have such a man crush for Diamond Joe. I want to have a relationship with him too. But don't worry, I will love you.

Michelle: This is very sudden. What would it even look like?

Obama: Well, I don't know. We would still spend a lot of time together. But we could also have dank threesomes. And smoke plenty of weed. Lots of salt about how this election played out.
What part of your hand is the most salty? The NaCls
Its best to put your phone on some rice when its wet Asian people will come at night and fix it
I heard McDonalds is really bad for you. That why I only eat at Burger king.
What do you call an ill Saudi Arabian? Sikh
A man is driving with his wife and a small child when a cop pulls them over. A man is driving with his wife and a small child. A cop pulls them over and makes the man take a breathalyzer test. “See,” the cop says, “you are drunk.” The man protests that the breathalyzer must be broken and invites the cop to test his wife. She also registers as drunk. Exasperated, the man invites the cop to test his child. When the child registers drunk as well, the cop shrugs, says, “Yes, perhaps it is broken,” and sends them on their way. 

As they drive off, the man turns to his wife and says, “See, I told you it wouldn’t hurt to give the kid a couple of shots of vodka.”
Communism jokes are not funny Unless everyone gets them
What's the difference between your mom and a bowling ball? Your mom can't fit in a bowling ball. 
2 cactuses are talking to each other One of them asks the other, "Hey, do you know how to speak the human language?"

To which he responds, "yeah it's easy, they always say ouch!"
What do you call a wine loving horse? Chardon-neigh.
i don't think women should stay in the kitchen... i mean, how are they supposed to clean the rest of the house from there?
A Muslim enters the United States Oh sorry thought it was still 2016.
Do you know what the arch enemies of skinheads are? Blackheads.
David received a parrot for his birthday The parrot was fully grown with a bad attitude and worse vocabulary. Every other word was an obscenity. Those that weren't expletives, were to say the least, rude. David tried hard to change the bird's attitude and was constantly saying polite words, playing soft music, anything he could think of. Nothing worked. He yelled at the bird and the bird yelled back. He shocked the bird and the bird just got more angry and more rude. Finally, in a moment of desperation, David put the bird in the freezer, just for a few moments. He heard the bird squawk and kick and scream-then suddenly, there was quiet. 

David was frightened that he might have hurt the bird and quickly opened the freezer door. The parrot calmly stepped out and said "I believe I may have offended you with my rude language and actions. I'll endeavor at once to correct my behavior. I really am truly sorry and beg your forgiveness." David was astonished at the bird's change in attitude and was about to ask what had made such a dramatic change when the parrot continued, "May I ask what did the chicken do?"
All pro athletes are bilingual They speak English and profanity.
What was Tigger doing in the toilet? Looking for Pooh
I returned from court to see 'Welcome home dad' hanging over the foyer.. It was a suspended sentence
A cowboy is captured by a Native American tribe. The chief approaches the cowboy and tells him, "Your people have encroached upon our lands and killed our brothers, We may kill you in retribution. But we are generous. We will offer you one request per day for the next three days. Choose wisely. What is your first request?"

The cowboy thinks for a moment and asks for his horse. The tribesmen bring the horse and the cowboy whispers something into its ear. The horse takes off and arrives back that night with a beautiful blond on its back. She dismounts the horse and spends the night with the cowboy making passionate love. 

On the second day, the chief approaches the cowboy and says, "White man. You have two requests remaining. Think not of carnal desires but of how you might redeem yourself. What is your second request? 

Again the cowboy asks for his horse. The tribesmen bring the horse and the cowboy again whispers something into the horse's ear. The horse takes off and arrives back that night with a beautiful red-head on its back. The red-head dismounts and spends the night with the cowboy making passionate love.

On the third day, The chief again approaches the cowboy and says, "White man, today is your final request. Choose wisely. You may yet redeem yourself."

Without hesitation, the cowboy asks for his horse one more time. The tribesmen bring the horse and the cowboy grabs it by both of its ears, looks it in its eyes and yells, "POSSE, GODDAMNIT. BRING THE POSSE!"
Muslims in the U.S.A [Removed]
I have a Chinese friend with really bad internet His name is Hai Ping
Why did the scarecrow receive an award? It was outstanding in his field.
Tip: if you don't want comedians weighing in on politics.... ...don't elect a joke.

(Credit to Bo Burnham)
So what do you all think of the new House of Cards? I have to say that whole plot twist with Trump becoming the new president was quite unexpected.
My friend overdosed on Tofu The coroner called it a Soysoning 
How many Chicago Policemen does it take to crack an egg? None. It fell down the stairs.
A guy goes to a $5 lady of the night... ... and he gets crabs. So the next day, he goes back to complain. 

And the woman says, "Hey, it was only $5. What did you expect, lobster?"
I tied a rope and swallowed it I shit you knot!
What do you call a Hispanic radio station? Mixed Signals
If pronouncing your b's like v's makes you sound Russian... Then *soviet!*
I don't get what you guys are saying about how Mexicans hate Trump... ... Every Mexican I see is calling him a peachy cool arrow.
My rich uncle just passed away so I recently came into some money But now the bills are all stuck together
A English teacher says to a African student.. "okay you're doing really good with your English, I would like you to use the word dandelion in a sentence" the student replies "ohh that is easy, The giraffe, is bigger, dan de lion"
I hate people who use the wrong words in a sentence and don't correct themselves They sometimes should have the humidity to admit it.
I used to be up to date with memes... then I took an arrow to the knee
Why shouldn't you buy underwear from Ukraine? Because Chernobyl (cher-knob-el) fallout.
It's always I before E Except when you run a feisty heist on a weird beige foreign neighbor. 
I saw a man with a several rabbits on his head today... When I inquired as to why he had rabbits on his head, he simply stated "From a distance they look like hares"
Why do men sound like they're having an orgasm when they're lifting weights? And why is my father lifting weights in the bathroom?
McDonalds is releasing a new Japanese fish sandwich. It will be called The Real Mc Koi.
What kind of shoes do ninjas wear? Sneakers
I would cauliflower... ...but I don't have its number.
What did the Buddhist say to the hot dog vendor? Make me one with everything.
An illegal immigrant, a radical Muslim Jihadist, and President Trump were walking together on a beach.... An illegal immigrant, a radical Muslim Jihadist, and President Trump were walking together on a beach in Florida when the illegal stumbled over a bottle in the sand.
The immigrant picked up the bottle, rubbed the sand off it, and a genie appeared.
“I can only grant three wishes,” the genie said. “Since there are three of you, you may have a wish each.”
Pointing at the illegal immigrant, he said, “Since you found the bottle, you may have the first wish.”
The illegal immigrant said, “This country is racist against my people! I wish to take every illegal immigrant back to their homeland with a wall 1000 feet high to exclude everyone else, then we can finally be happy and live in peace!”
The genie clapped his hand and the illegal immigrant was transported to his homeland along with millions of “his” people inside a 1000 foot wall.  
Turning to the Jihadist, the genie asked, “And what is your wish?”  The radical Muslim Jihadist said, “This country is bigoted against those who practice Sharia Law! I wish to take all of my people away from this horrible place loaded with infidels so we can live in a theocracy in Islamic countries and serve Allah inside a 10,000 foot wall.  The genie clapped his hands and the jihadist, along with every other Radical Muslim in the country, was instantly transported to the Middle East inside their wall.
Turning to President Trump, the genie asked, “And what is your wish?”
"Fill them both with water."



Just found out I was dating a commie Guess I should've noticed the red flags earlier
What is the sound of Trump's head hitting the Liberty Bell? Dunnnnnnng
Letter to a madman Inside a hospice, a madman approaches the others with a blank paper, examining it with attention. The other crazy people can not resist curiosity and ask:

_ What is it?

The crazy one with the letter, responds

_ A letter from my brother

Even for the other crazy people, that was too absurd.

_ But the letter is blank.

The madman responds serenely

_ We do not talk anymore
having sex for pleasure Apart from humans, the only creature that has sex for pleasure is the dolphin.

I had to shag a lot of animals to find that out.

What did Dee Snider say he wanted for Christmas? I WANNA ROCK
What do you call it when a nail is driven through the canvas of a piece of artwork? A 'pain'-ting.
What do housewives do on Saturday nights? They go Sam's Clubbing
An undercover manatee ambushed a bunch of elves guarding a pot of gold “Aye! What creature art thouest?” the elves inquired.

The manatee responded in a kinky way, “Aye, I am the undercover manatee who goes by the name Agent O.”

The elves again inquired, “Are you here to steal our pot of gold?!”

“No,” responded Agent O, again in a kinky way, “I am here to steal the rainbow leading into the pot of gold.”

A bit confused, the elves asked the manatee, “But why are you here to steal our rainbow which beautifies our pot of Gold?!”

“Because,” Agent O responded, this time in the kinkiest of fashions, “The skin of my kind is gray and colorless. The colors of this rainbow will be applied to our skin, thus making our skin beautiful and appealing.”

Alas, the kinky manatee stole the rainbow, and placed gently the rainbow into his burlap sack.
“The colors are mine!” Agent O shouted as he leaped into the river.

As he swam away, the elves pitter pattered over to the riverbank. Understandably distraught, the elves began squealing, and cried out in highest pitch of voices,

“O, the Hue Manateeeee!”
A college student is taking a walk in Central park in New York. Suddenly he sees a little girl being attacked by a pit bull dog. He runs over and starts fighting with the dog. He saves the girl's life, but the pit bull is killed in the process.   
  
A policeman who was watching the scene walks over and says: "You are a hero, tomorrow you can read it in all the newspapers: "Brave New Yorker saves the life of little girl". The man says: - "But I am not a New Yorker!" "Oh ,then it will say in newspapers in the morning: 'Brave American saves life of little girl'", the policeman answers. "But I am not an American!", says the man. "Oh, what are you then?" The man says: - "I am a Saudi !"   
  
The next day the newspapers says: "Islamic extremist kills innocent American dog. 
Husband: "I have good news and bad news" Wife: "Tell me the bad news first."

Husband: "The washing machine broke."

Wife: "And the good news?"

Husband: "The dogs are clean."
My grandmother died stoned. She was showing too much leg.
I work in construction... We don't have side pieces, we have back hoes
A woman goes to movies with her newborn son. The kid starts crying and keeps crying for 10-15 minutes. 

Frustrated, a man screams :" damnit woman, put a boob in the kid's mouth. "

Angered by the remark, the woman's husband stands up and starts lecturing the guy in the dark about how he is a awful human being and doesn't know how to behave with woman. 

The man screams again :" put one in his mouth too. "
A male patient is lying in bed in the hospital, wearing an oxygen mask over his mouth and nose. A young student nurse appears and gives him a partial sponge bath.

"Nurse,"' he mumbles from behind the mask, "are my testicles black?"

Embarrassed, the young nurse replies, "I don't know, Sir. I'm only
here to wash your upper body and feet."

He struggles to ask again, "Nurse, please check for me. Are my
testicles black?"

Concerned that he might elevate his blood pressure and heart rate from worrying about his testicles, she overcomes her embarrassment and pulls back the covers.

She raises his gown, holds his manhood in one hand and his testicles gently in the other.

She looks very closely and says, "There's nothing wrong with them,
Sir. They look fine."

The man slowly pulls off his oxygen mask, smiles at her, and says very slowly, "Thank you very much. That was wonderful.
Now listen very, very closely: 

Are - my - test - results - back?"
I just enlisted my kids into the Navy. Or as the wife calls it, masturbated in the shower.
A pregnant prostitute visits her Doctor... The Doctor asks, "do you know who the father is?"

The prostitute replies, "if you ate a can of beans, would you know which one made you fart?"
Do you know what Mexicans think about Trump's wall? Who cares, they'll get over it..
I just came to a conclusion Best wank of my life
What do you call a tight fitting bra? A boobie trap.
A mathematician walks into a pizza bar and orders one pi He receives two 
I like my Thanksgiving turkey like I like my own ass On the dining room table, with my family gathered round, and with my grandmum's fists in it pulling out the stuffing.
Never trust a stairwell. Every time you turn around, it's a new story!
What is life? Better with drugs
If Trump deports all the Mexicans Who's going to build the wall?
A boy asks his father A boy asks his father: Where's the potato peeler?
Father: In the supermarket
Conservatives keep telling me to find Jesus How am I supposed to find him if they want him sent back to mexico and want a wall to keep him out?

Five year old granddaughter to me. Her: Knock, Knock.
Me: Who's there?
Her: Interrupting cow.
Me: Interrp....
Her MOO, MOO
The 10 minutes joke One morning, a girl was taking a shower with her mom. She asked, "Mommy, Mommy, what are those?"
The Mom says "Those are titties, dear."
"When will I get those?" the girl asks.
"When you're older." the Mom says.
The next morning, the girl is taking a shower with her dad.
"Daddy, Daddy, what's that?" she asks
"That's a penis, dear." he replies
"When will I get that?" she asks
"In ten minutes when your mom goes to work."


[I remember hearing this in high school and had to share]
So my wife thinks I'm really annoying... but we tried anal for the first time the other day so now I'm really a pain in her ass.
A woman meets a man... A woman meets a gorgeous man in a bar. They talk, they connect, they end up  leaving together.

They get back to his place, and as he shows her around his apartment, she notices that his bedroom is completely packed with sweet cuddly
teddy bears. Hundreds of cute small bears on a shelf all the way along the floor, cuddly  medium-sized ones on a shelf a little higher, and huge
enormous bears on the top shelf along the wall.

The woman is kind of surprised that this guy would have a collection of teddy bears, especially one that's so extensive, but she decides not to mention this to him, and is quite impressed by his sensitive side.

She turns to him... they kiss... and then they rip each other's clothes off and make hot steamy love.
After an intense night of passion with this sensitive guy, they are lying there together in the afterglow, the woman rolls over and asks, smiling, "Well, how was it?"

The man responds, "You can have any prize from the bottom shelf."
Why do you never see a black person with Down Syndrome? God doesn't punish anyone twice.
A doctor and his wife were sun A doctor and his wife were sunbathing on a beach when a well-endowed, beautiful, young, blonde woman in a tight-fitting bikini strolled passed. The woman looked at the doctor, smiled seductively, and said in a very sexy voice, "Hi there handsome. How are you doing?" before wiggling her backside and walking off. 
"Who was that?" demanded the doctor's wife. 
"Just a woman I met professionally," replied the doctor. 
"Oh yeah?" snarled his wife, "In whose profession? Yours or hers?"



What do you call a small knife used for killing gorillas? A harambit 
I wouldn't bother making a joke about an infinite line No point.
It's cool how today everyone is applauding patriots for standing up for human rights... ...and by next Sunday everyone will be back to hating the Patriots again
Why is Donald Trump the rarest form (real life incartination) of pepe? Because it can be witnessed only once in a *Melania*-um.
What do you call a female scientist? A scientits
I finally got one over. The other day, Louise and I got into some petty argument. (I say it was petty. She would have said it was Armageddon.) As is our nature, neither of us would admit the possibility that we might be in error.
To her credit, Louise finally said, 'Look. I'll tell you what. I'll admit I'm wrong if you admit I was right.'
'Fine.' I said.
She took a deep breath, looked me in the eye and said, 'I'm wrong.'
I grinned and replied, 'You're right.'

Mechanical Engineer NSFW Mechanical Engineer's wife Delivers a baby..

Wife Sends SMS to her Husband:
"Your New Vehicle is Launched."
Husband replies back:
"With Gear or Without Gear?*"
Screamed on a drunk to get out of the road He replied, an Aeroplane just flew off over my head,
What can a car make a difference ...
How long do owls live? Six and a half books.
One of life's greatest pleasures is watching your wedding video backwards... It starts off with lots of sex in a far flung exotic country.

Then you move on to a massive party, surrounded by your family and your best friends, getting drunk and having a great time.

Then you take off that ring, walk back down the aisle, leave the church, and go back to the pub with your friends after which an easy, stress-free, happy life awaits you.

Bliss.
Aztecs.... Are the religion of peace, you racist!
You know what they say about people with big feet... You could easily get a part-time job as a clown
I was offered sex with a 21 year old girl today.... In exchange, I was supposed to advertise some kind of bathroom cleaner. Of course I declined, because I am a person with high moral standards and strong willpower. Just as strong as Ajax, the super strong bathroom cleaner. Now available with scented lemon or vanilla.
What do you call a basement full of progressives? A whine cellar.
You were a still born baby.. Mother didn't want you but you were still born.
What do you call a blind dinosaur? A "Do-You-Think-He-Saw-urus"

How do you call a blind dinosaur's dog?

Do-You-Think-He-Saw-urus Rex
A Muslim walks into the U.S Just kidding 
When I feel like I have nobody to talk to... I call the NSA. They're really nice because they always listen.
I have a pizza.....I have a pineapple UGH! Satan's creation.
My science teacher taught us about gravity today. It was such a heavy subject to take... 
Two snakes walk into a bar... ^^^Wait, ^^^they ^^^slide...

^^^Nevermind...XD
Fastfood Clerk: Number 27! Double steak combo with extra fries! 

Man: Right here!

Clerk: Here you go sir, sorry about your weight.

Man: Oh, it wasn't long at al- wait...

Clerk: >:D
A father and his 6-year-old...... A father and his 6-year-old son are walking down the street, and they come across two dogs having sex. 
The boy is shocked by what he sees and asks his father "Daddy, what are they doing?"
The father, not wanting to lie to his son, says "they're just making a puppy."
"OK" says the son, and the father is relieved that he doesn't probe further.
The next day, the son bursts into his parents' room and sees them having sex. 
The father jumps up and quickly covers himself. 
Knowing he's in for an interesting talk, walks downstairs with him and they sit at the dining room table. 
His son asks him "Daddy, what were you and mommy doing?"
Again, wanting to be honest with his son, he says "me and mommy were making a baby."
His son pauses for a moment, thinking, and then replies "flip mommy over, I want a puppy!"
If the skin on your elbow is called a weenus... Is the skin on your knee called a knee-nus?

(I'm so sorry)

My teacher pointed at me with...... My teacher pointed at me with his ruler and said “at the end of this ruler is and idiot!” 
I got detention after I asked him which end he was referring to.
A priest is giving a nun a ride home after mass one day... As they come to a stoplight the priest rests his hand on the nuns knee. The nun says "Father remember Luke 14:10", and the priest removes his hand from her knee. A little while later they come to a stop again and he places his hand on her thigh, she again says "Father remember Luke 14:10", he quickly removes his hand. He doesn't try this again, after dropping her off he heads home and picks up his bible and flips to Luke 14:10 and it says, "Friend, move up to a better place"
What do you call a naked Asian? Barelee. 
Customer Service With A Smile ;) A Customer Service Clerk works for the local Grocery store. A woman who is visually upset, slams a 4 lb bag of flour on the table.

Can I help you? As the clerk tries and get her to relax from a 13 to an 8.

She yells at him: This flour is full of bugs!

He calmly asks the woman: What are you a vegetarian?
These Stolen Valor guys all seem homeless or mentally ill... Guess they're pretty good at impersonating our troops after all!
An Asian Keanu An Asian Keanu enters a room.

Asian Keanu got angry.

Asian Keanu Reeves.
Janet, a bit tipsy from the champagne, didn't realize the new office photocopier was a 3D photocopier. So Steve got a nice bust for his bookshelf for christmas.

I am sad because I did something today. doing something stood on my not-to-do-list for today
I saw my disrespectful co-worker today she was hot. "Wow, words can't describe how pretty you are." I said walking up to her.


She then replied looking at me as if I was a creep: "Uh thanks.. weirdo"


"But numbers can" I smirked.


"2/10. Bitch."
1-step guide for Asexual Reproduction Go fuck yourself
How do you know a girl is into you? Just pinch yourself, if you don't wake up, she doesn't.
My wife said she's had enough of me because I always get my directions mixed up. So I just packed my bags and right.
My wife was choking at dinner, so I flipped her over the table, pulled her knickers down and stuck my tongue up her arse. The shock made her spit out the obstruction and breathe again.

Thank god I knew the hind-lick manoeuvre!
President Trump! What about the aliens from space? We need a ROOF!
A poor little boy writes a letter to Santa A little boy from a very, VERY poor family writes a letter to Santa: "Dear Santa, I'm very poor and I don't have much. My dad passed away last year and my mom doesn't spend much time with me as she's usually very tired after drinking wine. I know that you brought all those rich kids from school plenty of fancy toys last year, but I don't care for these. However, I wish you could bring me a hat, a scarf and a pair of gloves, so I could go out and play with my friends in the snow. That would be the most beautiful day of my life. With love, Johnny".
A post office employee intercepts the letter, reads if, and is moved by the little kid's story. She decides to go around the office and collect some money to buy little Johnny the gift he's been dreaming of.
After chasing everyone in the office, she manages to gather $13... $14... $15. After work, she goes to a little shop nearby to buy the hat, scarf and gloves. Unfortunately, she only has enough money for a hat and a scarf. Oh well, that should do just fine. She wraps the gift, attaches a letter with it "Dear Johnny, here is the gift you've asked me for. Enjoy the company of your friends on this very special day. Your friend, Santa", and sends it to the kid. She feels great - a little kid's dream has been achieved thanks to her and her colleagues from the post office.
One week later, she intercepts another letter from the kid addressed to Santa, and is excited to read about the kid's wonderful Christmas Day: "Dear Santa. I received your gift, thank you very much. Unfortunately, I couldn't go out and play with my friends and had to stay home with my mom (she gets pretty mean after two bottles of wine), because there were only a hat and a scarf in the box (no gloves), and my mom wouldn't let me go out without a pair of gloves. It's probably those fuckers from the post office who stole the gloves. Love, Johnny"
People are counting down the time to the end of Trump's presidency... Are you really that excited to have Kanye West as the president of US?!
People like to compare Hillary Clinton to Hitler, but there's one huge difference: Hitler acknowledged he was at fault for killing people.
I was going to tell the joke about the scarecrow... but I think it has already been posted. 
What are they going to use to build the wall? The bricks that were shat by people when Trump became president.
A man went to the doctor The doctor said "im afraid your illness is terminal..."

The man asked "well how long do i have doc?" 

The doctor said "10"

The man asked "10 what?" 

The doctor said "9, 8, 7....."
Ask /r/personalfinance to draw you a line, they deliver a circle. They always make ends meet!
I go into a bar in scotland The bartender looks rather angry so I go up to him and ask what's up

He says 'you see that bridge over there' pointing outside. I built that. But do they call me Angus the bridge builder. Nooo. 

'You see this bar. I built it. Do they call me Angus the bar builder. No.' 

'But ye get caught with one goat..."
FDR hates cripple humor He can't stand it
I don't want to make a political joke It might get elected as president of the United States
So what if I don't know what "apocalypse" means. It's not like it's the end of the world
A man is caught staring so hard at his marriage certificate by his wife... She asks him what he's looking for.

He replies, "oh just the expiration date!"
A man walks into a bar with a newt on his shoulder... The bartender says "What a strange pet, what's his name?"

"Tiny." the man replies.

"What an odd name, why do you call him tiny?"

"Because he's my newt."
I know a Spanish philosopher and he lives in my kitchen... His name is Plato.
Why don't Jews have showers in their homes? Because they're too cheap to pay the bills. 
My girlfriend's a crappy computer ... she always shuts down when I need her but never shuts up when I don't.
What did the bread say before it jumped into the toaster? "I'M BREADY TO DIE"
I wanted a cat but the wife wanted a dog ... so we compromised and got a dog 
My blonde girlfriend and her Windows My girlfriend who happens to be blonde has still not upgraded her PC to Windows 10 but still continues to use version 7.  When I ask her why, she just changes the subject.

Finally I convince her to do the update, and then she calls me quite upset and says, "Honey, where the hell is the 'any' key?!"
I did exactly what you said Two blondes decided to rob a bank together. The first blonde, Judy plans the robbery and goes over the plan with the second blonde, Buffy, in great detail.

The robbery begins...

Judy drives up in front of the bank, stops the car and says to Buffy, "I want to make absolutely sure you understand the plan. You are supposed to be in and out of the bank in 
no more than three minutes with the cash. Do you understand the plan?"

"Perfectly," said Buffy.

Buffy goes in the bank while Judy waits in the getaway car. One minute passes... Two minutes pass... Seven minutes pass... and Judy is really stressing out.

Finally, the bank doors burst open! And here comes Buffy.

She's got a safe wrapped up in rope and is dragging it to the car. About the time she gets the safe in the trunk of the car, the bank doors burst open again with the security 
guard coming out. The guard's pants and underwear are down around his ankles while he is firing his weapon.

As the gals are getting away, Judy says, "You are such a blonde! I thought you understood the plan!"

Buffy said, "I did... I did exactly what you said!"
A man is sitting next to a woman on a jet that's getting ready to take off. Suddenly, the man sneezes. He unzips his pants and wipes off the end of his penis with his handkerchief. He zips up and continues reading his magazine. The woman cannot believe what she just saw.  
   
Then he sneezes again, unzips, pulls out his penis and wipes it off with a handkerchief. The woman says, "Excuse me, sir, but that is disgusting and rude — and if you do it again I am going to call the flight attendant and have you removed from this plane."  
He says, "I am so sorry, but I have this very rare, embarrassing physical handicap that causes me to have an orgasm every time I sneeze."  
   
The woman, disarmed by the man's honesty and somewhat embarrassed by her own callousness, says, "Oh you poor man. Are you taking anything for it?"   
   
He answers, "Pepper."
Breast Inplants They such a silly-con
There are three types of people in this world. People who can count and people who can't.
China's time zone is 28 days behind ours. "Chinese New Year"
I like my women like I like my moose Big, brown, and horny
Why did you just stand there? An elderly woman had just returned to her home from an evening of church services when she was startled by an intruder.

She caught him burglarizing her home of its valuables and she yelled: "Stop! Acts 2:38! Repent and be baptized, in the name of Jesus Christ, so that your sins may be forgiven." The burglar stopped in his tracks. The woman calmly called the police and explained what she had done. As the officer cuffed the man to take him in, he asked the burglar, "Why did you just stand there? All the old lady did was yell a scripture at you."
Boyfriend: You know you can..... Boyfriend: You know you can be a real bitch.
Girlfriend: I have been called worse.
Boyfriend: Like what?
Girlfriend: Your girlfriend!
That's a nice ham you have there It would be a shame if someone put an 's' at the start and an 'e' at the end...
What do Intel, Google, Uber, eBay, McDonalds, Budweiser, AT&T, Oracle, Disney, Boeing, IBM and Apple have in common? Immigrants
Dicks are like LAYS potato chips... No one ever sucks JUST ONE!!
Ho, ho, ho, Merry Christmas! This is what Santa Clause says when he sees your wife, mother and sister together in the same room.
A cannibal walked into a female patient's surgery room... "I'll take the eggs, please."
50% of Canada Is the letter A
I have at last fulfilled my dream of becoming arms dealer... ... by selling 3D printed prosthetic limbs for the needy.
A man parks in a handicapped spot One day a man parks in a handicapped spot. An elderly woman woman drives up from behind, beeps the man and says "young man your not disabled, you should not be parking here".

The man replies "did you just assume my gender". 

"Oh my mistake" says the woman
A Doctor gives his patient the bad news that he only has a week to live... Patient - "No, I don't accept that! I'd like an alternative fact please"

Doctor - "Money-wise, you are now set for life"
I really like food Sorry, I made a Misteak, that wasn't really a joke. It's even Grater with Cheese. Damn. That was just Punishment. 
Little Red Riding Hood is skipping happily down the road when she sees the Big Bad Wolf crouched down behind a log.

“My what big eyes you have, Mr. Wolf!” says Little Red Riding Hood. The wolf jumps up and runs away!!!

Further down the road, Little Red Riding Hood sees the wolf again. This time, he is crouched behind a tree stump. “My what big ears you have Mr. Wolf!” Again, the wolf jumps up and runs away.

About another two miles down the road, Little Red Riding Hood sees the wolf again, this time crouched down behind a road sign. “My what big teeth you have Mr. Wolf!” 

With that, the Big Bad Wolf jumps up and screams…”Will you fuck off?! I’m trying to take a shit!”
What's 2 + 2? A company was hiring, and had the selection down to a mathematician,  an engineer, and a statistician.  They called the mathematician in, and asked him what 2 + 2 was. He said, " well, in base 5 and up, it's 4, but in lower bases, it could be 10 or 11 or 100.

They called the engineer in and asked him what 2 + 2 was. He said, " theoretically, it's 4, but it's actually impossible to create a 2 inch rod and another 2 inch rod and place them end-to-end and get 4 because of measurement precision, temperature, etc."

They called in the statistician and asked him what 2 + 2 was. He leaned in close, squinted his eyes and grinned a little, looked right and left, then said, "what do you want it to be?"
Engineer smarts. An optomist, a pessimist,  and an engineer were all shown a 24 ounce glass with 12 ounces of water in it. 

The optomist looked and said, "the glass is half full."

The pessimist looked and said, "the glass is half empty."

The engineer looked and said, "there's twice as much glass as you need."
How do the Welsh eat cheese? Caerphilly 
My roommate asked to borrow my earbuds... Roommate: can I borrow your earbuds?
Me: sorry, I don't share.
Roommate: why not?
Me: ear diseases...
Roommate: what are talking about?!
Me: haven't you ever heard of hearing AIDS?!

Note: I apologize for nothing! Dad jokes for life!
Apparently Abraham Lincoln kept extremely detailed records of every single tree he cut down, detailing the type of tree, dimensions, even the location where it was cut, and more. They're called the Lincoln Logs.
A guy dies and wakes up on a beach. Nice weather, hot girls playing beach volleyball, barbecues everywhere, laughter and joy.                                                   All of a sudden, Satan comes up to him. "Welcome to hell. Enjoy yourself, have a drink, have a hamburger and check out the area. If you need anything or have a question, feel free to ask me." he says.                                                                                      The guy walks along the beach, has a few drinks with a nice girl. He walks over a hill, when he sees a hole in the ground, full with tormented people, flames rising up from the hole.                      The guy runs towards the beach until he finds Satan.                       "Hey, I found this hole and all these people are being tormented... What´s that about?"                                                                        "Oh," Satan says, "that´s for the Christians, they want it that way."
Whats the hardest part of eating a vegetable? The wheelchair
Whats the best part about sleeping with a midget? You're sure to get a little head
Joe wanted to buy a Harley motorcycle. He doesn't have much luck, until one day, he comes across a Harley with a 'for sale' sign on it. 

The bike looks better than a new one, although it is 10 years old. It's shiny and in mint condition.

He buys it and asks the seller how he kept it in such great condition for 10 years.

'Well, it's quite simple,' says the seller, 'whenever the bike is outside and it's gonna rain, rub Vaseline on the chrome.It protects it from the rain, and he 
hands Joe a jar of Vaseline. 

That night, his girlfriend, Sandra, invites him over to meet her parents. 
Naturally, they take the bike there.

Just before they enter the house, Sandra stops him and says, 'I have to 
tell you something about my family.

'When we eat dinner, we don't talk.

In fact, the FIRST person who says anything during dinner has to do the dishes.'

'No problem,' he says.. And in they go.

Joe is shocked.Right in the middle of the living room is a huge stack of dirty dishes.

In the kitchen is another huge stack of dishes. Piled up on the stairs, in the corridor, everywhere he looks dirty dishes.

They sit down to dinner, and sure enough, no one says a word.

As dinner progresses, Joe decides to take advantage of the situation.

He leans over and kisses Sandra.

No one says a word.

He reaches over and fondles her breasts. Nobody says a word.

So he stands up, grabs her, rips her clothes off, throws her on the table 
and screws her, right there in front of her parents.

His girlfriend is a little flustered, her dad is obviously livid and her mom horrified when he sits back down, but no one says a word.

He looks at her mom. She's got a great body too.

Joe grabs mom, bends her over the table, pulls down her panties, and screws her every which way but loose 
right there on the dinner table.

She has a big orgasm, & Joe sits down.

His girlfriend is furious, her dad is boiling, & Mom is beaming from ear to ear. But still ... . Total silence.

All of a sudden there is a loud clap of thunder, and it starts to rain.

Joe remembers his bike, so he pulls the jar of Vaseline from his pocket.

Suddenly the father shouts.
I'll do the fuckin’ dishes!!
Trump, how do you plan on building the wall? 140 characters at a time
How did the roman cannibal feel about his victim? He was glad he ate her.
Things in the United States have been awfully unfortunate as of late It's almost as if it were built upon a gigantic native american burial ground 
A three-legged dog walks into a saloon in the Old West   A three-legged dog walks into a saloon in the Old West. He slides up to the bar and announces: ''I'm looking for the man who shot my paw.''
How do you trigger a switch? Flip it off.
Which bear can dissolve in water? A polar bear
Did you hear the one about the dyslexic agnostic insomniac? He stayed up all night wondering if there was a dog.
Dead battery? The car stood ¡n the darkness of a deserted road. Directing the beam from his flashlight onto the automobile, a newly assigned policeman approached the car. When he came close enough to see inside the car, he found a guy and his girl silently sìtting in the front seat.

“Dead battery?” he asked the boy.

“No,” the boy replied, glaring at his girl companion,“flat tire!”

Sign outside at "Justice of the Peace" You furnish the bride...........we will do the rest.
The new season of House of Cards will be nothing compared to what lies ahead with President Trump!
What does a prostitute wear on her feet? Whore shoes.
“Dear you can’t go to the theater in your old coat, can you? Husband: “Dear you can’t go to the theater in your old coat, can you?

Wife (hopefully): “Certainly not, dearest.”

Husband: “Just what I thought so I only bought one ticket.”

Why was the dog shaking? He had Barkinson's
What's the difference between gluten and hillbillies? One's inbred, the others in bread
United States of America
There's been a shooting at a local bar... And the only survivor is a monkey. The police ask the monkey what the men over at bar itself were doing. The monkey mimes them drinking. The police then ask the monkey what the group over in the corner were doing. The monkey mimes the group playing poker. The police ask the monkey what the group in the other corner were doing. The monkey mimes them drinking and playing poker. Finally the police ask what the monkey was doing. The monkey mimes shooting up the entire bar with a machine gun. 
"Give it to me," my girlfriend yelled. "I'm so fucking wet, give it to me now!"  She could scream all she wanted, I was keeping the umbrella
I was talking to a fat girl about her weight... I was addressing the literal elephant in the room. 
How many Scottish highlanders does it take to change a light bulb? There can be only one.
I'm surprised Trump ran as a Republican I thought he was running as a joke
My wife was abducted by a gang of mimes. They did unspeakable things to her.
I had a donkey. I named it Heeh.  It died.  Heeh awwwww.  :-(
I enjoy my women like I enjoy my coffee... Blindfolded and scared.
What is a pirate's favorite type of joke? Traditionally a pun involving an "arrr", but for the purposes of this joke, it's sarrrcasm.
What's the difference between New York City and the Land of Mordor? Two Towers.
Soliciting a blowjob is illegal. Soliciting a blowjob is illegal, but betting a whore $50 she can't swallow your cum isn't.  
In the 90's Arsenal Soccer Club  Had a player called David Dicks. When he was injured,the Newspaper wrote"Arsenal to play without Dicks". The coach was upset so the Newspaper changed the headline to read"Arsenal to play with Dicks out"... A record number of women attended the match
What do you call a sketchy neighborhood in Italy? A Spaghetto.
I'm not a Grammar Nazi I'm alt-write
I like women like i like my pizza Crusty with lots of cheese.
I don't like holocaust jokes. Anne Frankly you shouldn't either. 
What's an SS soldier's favorite key? I don't know, but I know it's not C!

They say when you've hit rock bottom, the only way is up... Well, I must have drilled a fucking hole in that rock because I keep falling.
If the Scottish started to colonize North America before the British... Could I say that the Scott Pilgrims landed at Plymouth Rock?
What was Trump's reaction to the petition for him to release his tax returns Not my precedent
3 moles were digging underground. They are in perfect line. Out of nowhere each gets a slightly different smell of the same source.

"What is that delicious smell in front of us?" Asks the first mole. 

"I don't know know, but it smells like cotton candy!" Replies the middle mole.

"No, no! It has got to be butterscotch!" The first shouts. The first and middle look to the mole at the end of the line.

"Who do you agree with?"

The last mole stops. "I disagree with the both of you. It smells like molasses!"
I was told the general rules of life is to help people, be nice and give aids. So I don't know why everybody is getting mad at me for infecting them. 
I like my women like I like my steaks bloody and full of knives
What's the difference between jam and jelly I can't jelly my dick in your mom's ass
I like my women like I like my coffee Not tasting something gritty and hairy when slurping.
They're restoring Auschwitz to its past condition. My first question is how soon they will have it operating.
I walked upto my black cop friend and said "I always wanted to be a clack man, would you help me?" He said sure... and put my hands up where he can see them.
Mike: I'm really glad I wasn't born in France. Jim: Why?
 
Mike: I can't speak French.
A director, an accountant and and engineer go for a round of golf... By the time they get to the fourth, there's a bunch of guys thrashing around blocking the course. The director calls over a groundsman and says "Who the hell are those bloody idiots up ahead?"
"Ah yes sir, they're from the local school for the blind."
"You mean they're actually blind?" Says the director incredulously.
"Yes sir."
"That's bloody ridiculous, time is money and I have an urgent meeting this afternoon!"
The accountant says "Well, in these tough finacial times, the Club probably needs all the revenue it can get."
The engineer says "So why don't they play at night?."
I am 48 and my wife is 8 months pregnant. am i too old to be a dad?
How did Donald Trump convince Mike Pence to be his Vice President? He told him the job would be worth as much as a warm bucket of piss. Then, he showed him a video. 
Why didn't the shrimp share his food?? He was a little shellfish
Whats the difference between an anal thermometer and an oral thermometer? The taste
2 Christians are lost in the Arabian desert The first day is hot, and they're miserable after running out of food and water.  The night is surprisingly cold and even worse than the day.  The second day and night are even worse.

On the third morning, hotter than the past 2 days, they see a mosque.  "We're saved!" exclaims one.  The other is wary and says he doesn't think they'll help Christians.  The first says he doesn't care, he's so hungry he'd rather be killed than starve.  The second one decides to tell them he's Muslim.

They arrive and the first man says he's Christian and asks for help.  The Muslims are very friendly and tell him they have plenty of food and water for him.  The second one tells them he's Muslim.  The reply: "Salaam, brother!  Happy Ramadan!"
A man and a woman started to have sex in the middle of a dark forest A man and a woman started to have sex in the middle of a dark forest. After about 15 minutes of it, the man finally gets up and says, "Damn, I wish I had a flashlight!". The woman says, "Me too, you've been eating grass for the past ten minutes! 
What are twins favorite fruits? Pears
The more you know, the more you don't know. What constitutes terrorism
Mountain ranges aren't funny They're hill areas.
What did the ocean said to the shore? Nothing, it just waved.
Trump: "Hows that Mexican mall going?" "Mall? We thought you said wall"

Trump: "No way that's harsh, also hows that Muslim band looking?"
You think 7 years is bad luck for breaking a mirror??? Try breaking a condom
The Unemployed Engineer An engineer who was unemployed for a long time decided to open a medical clinic. He puts a sign outside the clinic: "A cure for your ailment guaranteed at $500; we'll pay you $1,000 if we fail." A Doctor thinks this is a good opportunity to earn $1,000 and goes to his clinic. Doctor: "I have lost my sense of taste." Engineer: "Nurse, please bring the medicine from box 22 and put 3 drops in the patient's mouth." Doctor: "This is Gasoline!" Engineer: "Congratulations! You've got your taste back. That will be $500."
The Doctor gets annoyed and goes back after a couple of days later to recover his money. Doctor: "I have lost my memory, I cannot remember anything." Engineer: "Nurse, please bring the medicine from box 22 and put 3 drops in the patient's mouth." Doctor: "But that is Gasoline!" Engineer: "Congratulations! You've got your memory back. That will be $500."
The Doctor leaves angrily and comes back after several days, more determined than ever to make his money back. Doctor: "My eyesight has become weak." Engineer: "Well, I don't have any medicine for this. Take this $1,000," passing the doctor a $500 note. Doctor: "But this is $500..." Engineer: "Congratulations! You've got your vision back! That will be $500."
I have Yogg-Saron as a psychiatrist.... I don't think he's good, whenever I walk in to his room, I feel like I'm getting more insane by the minute. 
Why Do Scottish people wear kilts? Because a sheep can hear a zipper go down a mile away.
What is a Freudian slip? It's when you say one thing but fuck your mother
My friend did some graffiti with me He just tagged along.
There was a kidnapping at my school He woke up.
I have big feet... It runs in the family
Why did Hitler prefer pajamas more than suits Cause they are more kampfy
I was going to make a joke about sodium but then I thought Na.
A bear joke An 80 year old man was having his annual checkup, and the doctor asked him how he was feeling.
"I've never been better!" he boasted.
"I've got an eighteen year old bride who's pregnant, and having my child! What do you think about that?"
The doctor considered this for a moment, then said, "Let me tell you a story. I knew a guy who was an avid hunter.
He never missed a season. But one day went out in a bit of a hurry, and he accidentally grabbed his umbrella instead of his gun."
The doctor continued, "So he was in the woods, and suddenly a grizzly bear appeared in front of him!
He raised up his umbrella, pointed it at the bear, and squeezed the handle."
"And do you know what happened?" the doctor queried.
Dumbfounded, the old man replied "No."
The doctor continued, "The bear dropped dead in front of him!"
"That's impossible!" exclaimed the old man. "Someone else must have shot that bear."
"That's kind of what I'm getting at..." replied the doctor.
*Challenger anniversary* joke: What did Christa McAuliffe say to her husband before they left the house? You feed the cats, I'll feed the fish. 




The "too soon?" Joke from 30 years ago. 
What's the difference between the Harriet Tubman and the Red Hot Chili Peppers? Harriet Tubman was a heroine to the slaves; the Red Hot Chili Peppers are slaves to the heroin!
Why do moths fly with their legs apart? Have you ever seen the size of moth balls? 
"Dad, why couldn't the doctors save grandpa's life? "Doesn't matter son, he would have suffocated in the coffin"
A young artist puts his first exhibit in an art gallery ... and a well known art critic is in attendance.

The critic says to the young artist, "would you like my opinion on your work?"

"Yes, " says the artist.

"It's worthless," says the critic

The artist replies, "I know, but tell me anyway."
Donald Trump's family bought him a Gandalf the Grey costume for his birthday. Unfortunately, this wasn't the sort of Grand Wizard outfit he had in mind...
Trump decided to make some music with his old clarinet... he called it "Alternative Rock."
How about that train food? It's off the rails

Who was the roundest knight at the Round Table? Sir Cumference
Not saying there is a direct correlation between Trump's election... But the Chinese did say this would be the year of the Cock ages ago!
I like my women how I like my coffee. Without a penis
They really grow them big in Texas A Texan went to Chicago and thought he would buy a new "city" outfit. 

He went into Marshall Fields and when asked by a sweet young woman if she could help him, answered, "Yes ma'am, ya see, I'm from Texas and I want to buy a complete outfit." 

Well, her eyes lit up as she asked, "Where he would like to start?" 

"Well ma'am, how about a suit?"

"Yes sir, what size?"

"Size 53 ... tall, ma'am."

"Wow, that's really big."

"Yes ma'am, they really grow them big in Texas." 

"What's next?" she asked. 

He replied, "How about some shoes."

"What size?"
"Size 15 ... double D."

"Wow, that's really big!"

"Yes ma'am, they really grow them big in Texas." 

"What's next?"

"Well, I reckon I'll need a shirt."

"Yes sir, what size?"

"Nineteen and a half ... 38," he replied.

"Wow, that's really big!"

"Yes ma'am, they really grow them big in Texas."

She virtually glowed as she asked, "Whew ... is there anything else I can do for you?"

"No ma'am , I reckon that will be all." 

Well she tallied up his bill while the Texan was counting out his money. She asked, "Sir could I ask you a question?"

"Yes ma'am, I already know what it is and the answer is four inches."

She is astonished and blurts out, "Why, my boyfriend is bigger than that!" 

Without so much as a stutter, the Texan replied, "Across ma'am?"
Women are like Christmas gifts... They lose value after 25.
My girlfriend finally asked me who I've had sex with in all of my life I held back nothing and told her about every one of them. My first, the girls in higschool, that one time with her friend back in college, until I got to her... I probably should've stopped there.
What do you call a dog with no legs? It doesn't matter what you call him, he's not coming.
I have a Taiwanese friend who is is incredibly rude and bossy He has a strong Taipei personality
What does the next election and hindsight have in common? They both 2020
A man sits at a bar crying The barkeeper asks him: "Why are you crying?"
He answers:"My wife and I had an argue and she said she won't talk to me again for a whole year."
"That's terrible", the barkeeper replied. 
The Man:"Worse, the year is over today!"
Sometimes I do things to children that they're too young to understand... ...such as teaching them calculus and microbiology.
Donald Trumps hands are not that small Any hands would look small on such a massive cunt
Man didn't invent the wheel It invented itself after seeing Chuck Norris.
An English speaker, a French speaker, a Spanish speaker, and a German speaker are in a park... ... when a man stands up on a table in front of them and asks if they can see him.
They all nod and say:
"Yes."
"Oui."
"Si."
"Ja."
How many Germans does it take to change a lightbulb? One. We are efficient and don't have humor.